---
author: Matt Cromwell
author-first: Matt
author-last: Cromwell
author-note: |
    Matt Cromwell holds a Master of Arts in history from San Diego State
    University.
book-reviewed: |
    John Stauffer and Benjamin Soskis. <em>[The Battle Hymn of the Republic:
    A Biography of the Song that Marches On](https://global.oup.com/academic/product/the-battle-hymn-of-the-republic-9780199837434?cc=us&lang=en&)</em>. New York, NY: Oxford
    University Press, 2013. 392 pp. ISBN 978-0-19-983743-4.
layout: article
title: 'Review: The Battle Hymn of the Republic'
vol: 16
year: 2014
...

This "biography" of the patriotic anthem, "Battle Hymn of the Republic,"
highlights landmark periods and movements in U.S. history from the
post-Civil War period until the near present. Stauffer and Soskis use
the Battle Hymn as their medium to tell a long, winding tale of American
politics both liberal and conservative, race relations both harmonious
and abrasive, and religious history both high-minded and acerbic.

The authors open with a "family history" of the Battle Hymn, contrasting
it to its "siblings"---"Say Brothers Will You Meet Us," "John Brown's
Body," and "Solidarity Forever"---the other songs set to the same tune
at the time. The different messages of these anthems highlight how the
Battle Hymn most closely articulated the type of reconciliation the
North and South thought necessary and possible in the post-Civil War
period.

*The Battle Hymn of the Republic* is far more than a musicological
treatise. Relying primarily on literary analysis, Stauffer and Soskis
use the Hymn to frame topics since the Civil War era in new ways. For
example, the chapter on African American's fondness for the Battle Hymn
emphasizes W.E.B Du Bois and Martin Luther King, Jr.'s struggles for
"truth to march on." The chapter on evangelicalism focuses on Billy
Graham and his millennialist outlook on American society. Graham
connected strongly with the opening line of the tune: "Mine eyes have
seen the glory of the coming of the Lord."

Having expounded on the Hymn's musical history and explored a wide
variety of political, cultural, and religious tensions, the authors
describe the thread that ties the chapters together. So many different
groups over so many different periods felt a resonance with the Battle
Hymn, they argue, because of its articulation of American civil
religion. The Hymn gives voice to a distinctly Christian message that is
synonymous with American might and endurance. As a powerful example,
Brigadier General Theodore Roosevelt Jr. rallied his troops at D-Day by
leading them in the Battle Hymn. One soldier remarked on the sobering
effect of singing, "As God died to make men holy, let us die to make men
free." For Stauffer and Soskis, this anecdote illuminates the American
longing for a type of messianic American hope for the future, giving
religious meaning to the political realities of the nation-state.

Given this strong conclusion, the book feels almost split in two. One
half serves as a musicological historical treatment and the other a
poignant political and religious historical commentary. While combining
the two might seem a bit jarring, the work as a whole is remarkable in
its poignancy and thoughtfulness. Those interested in all things
political, religious, patriotic, and even musical will find excellent
material and useful insight in Stauffer and Soskis's work.
