---
author: 'A. Glenn Crothers'
author-first: 'A. Glenn'
author-last: Crothers
author-note: |
    A. Glenn Crothers is assistant professor of History at the University of
    Louisville and director of research at the Filson Historical Society.
book-reviewed: |
    Thomas C. Kennedy. <em>A History of Southland College: The Society of
    Friends and Black Education in Arkansas</em>. Fayetteville: The
    University of Arkansas Press, 2009. 424 pp. ISBN: 978-1-55-728916-2.
+ book-link: http://muse.jhu.edu/books/9781610750011
layout: article
title: |
    Review: A History of Southland College: The Society of Friends and Black
    Education in Arkansas
vol: 16
year: 2014
...

In the immediate aftermath of the Civil War, members of the Society of
Friends (or Quakers), reflecting their century-long campaign to end
slavery and racial oppression in the United States, mobilized to aid and
educate the freedpeople of the southern states. Historians have
documented East Coast Friends' short-lived efforts in Virginia and South
Carolina, but they have paid little attention to Midwest Friends' much
lengthier endeavors in Arkansas. Beginning in 1863 and continuing for
over sixty years, Indiana Quakers sponsored and supported the black
college of Southland. Thomas Kennedy's *A History of Southland College*
offers an exhaustive account of Friends' long struggle to sustain the
school and improve race relations in post-Civil War Arkansas, but the
wealth of detail in the narrative often overwhelms the story's
significance.

Kennedy emphasizes the sharp cultural, economic, and social differences
between Wayne County, Indiana, the prosperous heartland of Midwest
Quakerism, and Phillips County, Arkansas, located in the Mississippi
Delta and devastated by war, the end of slavery, and the postwar decline
of the cotton economy. Kennedy argues that Indiana Friends, who first
arrived in the county seat of Helena in October 1863, came unprepared
for "the always-alien and sometimes-hostile" (18) Arkansas environment,
and they never completely bridged the racial, cultural, and social
divide between themselves and local African Americans. Still, Friends
sponsored by the Indiana Yearly Meeting arrived with high aspirations:
give "physical aid" to the ex-slaves and encourage their "moral uplift"
by teaching the Quaker religion and establishing schools (20). By April
1864, Calvin and Alida Clark spearheaded Friends' efforts in the area,
running a black orphanage and school in Helena. In May 1866, with the
aid of black Union troops, they moved the school into the countryside to
escape the river town's hostile and morally suspect atmosphere. In its
early years, Southland benefited from the presence of the Freedmen's
Bureau, the Republican-dominated Arkansas legislature, and Indiana
Friends' early postwar enthusiasm for the cause of the freedpeople.
During the Clarks' tenure---which ended in 1886---the school averaged over
two hundred students per year (though the numbers fluctuated widely) and
graduated a large number of black teachers who settled throughout the
South. The Clarks' promotion of the Quaker faith among the local black
community proved equally impressive. By 1880, the Southland Monthly
Meeting had nearly four hundred members, all but four of whom were
African American, and it enjoyed the leadership of black preachers.

But the Clarks also faced an array of problems that plagued the school
throughout its life. Above all, the Southland community developed amidst
a white community hostile to black education and advancement and to the
Quaker outsiders. This antagonism---and associated violence---increased
after the mid-1870s when the collapse of Reconstruction enabled former
Confederates to recapture political power. In addition, black poverty
undermined the school's efforts to achieve financial self-sufficiency
and limited the ability of local blacks to attend. Friends' commitment
to the school also wavered over time, reflecting broader changes in
northern attitudes toward the South and African Americans. As a result,
the school never enjoyed financial stability, and its leaders and
supporters scrambled to raise funds to keep it afloat. Doctrinal splits
within Quakerism, particularly the growth of the evangelical Holiness
Movement, exacerbated the school's financial difficulties, distracting
Friends from their benevolent efforts and limiting the pool of potential
donors to the school.

In Southland's later years, Quakers divided over the purpose of the
school, with many supporters, including the school's last director L.
Raymond Jenkins, calling for manual education instead of academic
training. Motivated in part by racist assumptions about black
capabilities, the promoters of manual education sought to transform
Southland into another Tuskegee. But their plans, which involved the
purchase of more land and the construction of new buildings, pushed the
school deeper into debt and never produced the anticipated increase in
donations. Likewise, managerial reorganization that shifted oversight of
the school from the Indiana Friends to a national Quaker organization,
along with outreach to non-Quaker funding bodies, failed to stabilize
the school's finances. In the push for manual education, moreover,
Southland alienated many local African Americans who desired basic
academic skills, while losing its longtime directors, Harry and Anne B.
Wolford, who during their twenty-year management of the school developed
a close relationship with the local black community and valuable
connections to local white businesses. Indeed, in the school's last
years, an alienated Wolford used his influence among the black community
to undermine Jenkins's tenure. In the early 1920s, when Southland failed
to obtain funds from national philanthropic organizations, Friends
decided to close the school, now deeply indebted and with its physical
plant in decay. The Southland Monthly Meeting, long in decline, had
ceased to meet by the fall of 1923.

Quakers' efforts in Arkansas ultimately failed. Yet Kennedy, impressed
by the struggle to keep "an improbable school and impossible dream
alive" for so many years, sees evidence of Friends' "Light in the Lord"
(263). But if the Southland story inspires, it also reveals the
limitations of racial benevolence in the post-Civil War era, even if
this aspect of the story is often obscured by Kennedy's detailed
narrative. For all their good will, Friends could not escape the racial
biases of the era, making it difficult for them to provide aid that
bridged the cultural differences between white Friends and local African
Americans and effectively meet black needs. Over its lifetime, Southland
aided hundreds of individual African American students, but it could not
overcome the political and cultural forces arrayed against black uplift.
