---
author: 'Carolyn R. Dupont'
author-first: 'Carolyn R.'
author-last: Dupont
author-note: |
    Carolyn R. Dupont is an assistant professor of History at Eastern
    Kentucky University.
book-reviewed: |
    Stephen R. Haynes. <em>The Last Segregated Hour: The Memphis Kneel-Ins and
    the Campaign for Southern Church Desegregation</em>. New York: Oxford
    University Press, 2012. 314 pp. 978-0-19-539505-1.
book-link: http://lsupress.org/books/detail/apocalypse-and-the-millennium-in-the-american-civil-war-era/
layout: article
title: 'Review: The Last Segregated Hour'
vol: 16
year: 2014
...

**Editor's Note**: Prior to her appointment as book review editor with
*JSR*, Carolyn Dupont had been assigned Stephen Haynes's *The Last
Segregated Hour* to review. Her own work on white Christians in
Mississippi during the Civil Rights era made her a good choice for Art
Remillard, who served as our book review editor. Since Haynes had been
slated to review Dupont's *Mississippi Praying* prior to her arrival at
the *JSR*, we have followed a different protocol for these two reviews.
The Editor handled all publication decisions regarding these reviews,
which is typically left to the book review editor's discretion.



On Palm Sunday 1964, leaders at the prestigious and prosperous all-white
Second Presbyterian Church in Memphis, Tennessee turned away a black
worshipper. When more African Americans returned on subsequent Sundays,
the church refused them as well. In a nation rapidly growing disgusted
with blatant and apparently gratuitous expressions of white supremacy,
Second Presbyterian's closed doors sent tremors in multiple directions.
Christians nationwide heaped shame upon the congregation, denominational
authorities censured it, and internal conflict ultimately fractured the
church. The splinter communion, Independent Presbyterian, proudly
consecrated itself to the most conservative expressions of Christianity,
even as its constitution embraced an explicit whites-only policy.

In the fifty years since, Memphians and Presbyterians occasionally have
whispered about this unsavory history, but its exact lineaments remained
murky. Recently, however, Rhodes College professor Stephen Haynes has
skillfully laid out the story in *The Last Segregated Hour: The Memphis
Kneel-Ins and the Campaign for Southern Church Desegregation*. His work
joins a rash of new and forthcoming scholarship that explains how
southern white evangelicals met the challenge of black equality.

Haynes sets his story in its multiple contexts. The kneel-in campaign in
Memphis mimicked others already underway in the South; indeed, between
1960 and 1965, activists highlighted the moral dimensions of their
struggle in visits to white congregations in Atlanta, Savannah,
Tallahassee, Americus, Jacksonville, and Birmingham. Even as the Memphis
effort took flight, white churches in Jackson, Mississippi, refused
black activists Sunday after Sunday in a drama that endured some
ten-months, culminating when a downtown Methodist church refused two
bishops of its own denomination. Though many congregations appeared to
outsiders as unyielding fortresses of segregation, the activists' visits
actually deeply divided these bodies and sent reverberations through
their local and denominational networks. Often, it took years to settle
the fall-out that ensued from these simple but socially subversive
episodes of church-going.

Special circumstances raised the stakes in the Memphis case, elevating
Second Presbyterian to a primary locus of the denomination's struggles
over black equality. Most significantly, the church planned to host the
denomination's 1965 General Assembly---a great honor for any
congregation. But throughout the denomination, progressives objected
that convening this all-important gathering at a committed bastion of
segregation would reward a body that, in their minds, instead deserved
censure. Personal relationships added yet more dramatic elements: the
decision about whether to discipline the church by cancelling the
General Assembly's meeting there lay in the hands of the denomination's
moderator, Dr. Felix Gear, who had previously pastored that very
congregation. Perhaps more intriguing, the church's current pastor, Dr.
Jeb Russell, brother of leading segregationist and ardent civil rights
opponent Georgia Senator Richard Russell, remained thunderously silent
about the activity on the church steps until very late in the affair.
Finally, even while the deacons rejected black worshippers on a January
morning ten months after these episodes began, Russell preached a sermon
that revealed both his lack of sympathy with the Session's (the church's
governing body) decision to exclude black worshippers and his
unequivocal support for a non-discriminatory worship policy.

Further complicating matters at Second Presbyterian, the kneel-in
campaign featured the strong presence and leadership of white students
from Southwestern at Memphis (now Rhodes College), a denominational
college that received strong financial backing from area congregations
like Second. Segregationists who strove to halt the weekly visits
threatened to cut off contributions to the college. Some also wrote
letters to activist students' parents, suggesting that the white and
black students had formed interracial romantic relationships.

The pressure of the kneel-in campaign drove deep wedges between members
of the congregation, as evidenced by the public rift between the pastor
and the Session. Yet once the pastor and the denomination had made their
own convictions clear and mounting displeasure from the congregation
forced changes in Session personnel, about 340 members of Second
Presbyterian defected to a create a new congregation, Independent
Presbyterian. Denying that they had left Second over racial policies,
the new congregation declared only its devotion to "old fashioned
religion." Describing the Southern Presbyterian Church as a
theologically apostate body that had forsaken its historic roots,
members of the new church claimed their desire to be "a Bible church, a
prayer church, and a mission church." Though the new congregation
adopted no formal policy of racial segregation as such, its new
constitution did require that "its members and those visiting the Church
. . . shall be compatible with the congregation." (230)

Haynes skillfully weaves the many strands of this story together with a
fine attention to detail and nuance. His narrative lets many voices
speak, a major strength of the work made possible by his use of over 150
interviews with participants and observers, including white students
from Southwestern, black student activists, and church members who often
sat silent but bewildered by the activity on the front portico. For many
of these, the Memphis kneel-in campaign served as a catalyst for life
work in socially active forms of ministry or other kinds of activism.
Both Second Presbyterian and its splinter congregation, Independent
Presbyterian, struggle as they try to come to terms with a past
intimately connected to America's racial hierarchy. Yet many more
congregations no doubt have similar stories waiting to be told.
