---
author: Joseph Locke
author-first: Joseph
author-last: Locke
author-note: |
    Joseph Locke is an assistant professor of History at the University of
    Houston-Victoria.
book-reviewed: |
    Robert Wuthnow. <em>[Rough Country: How Texas Became America's Most Powerful
    Bible-Belt State](http://press.princeton.edu/titles/10327.html)</em>. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2014. 654 pp.
    ISBN 978-0-691-15989-8.
layout: article
title: 'Review: Rough Country'
vol: 16
year: 2014
...

"Texas is America's most powerful Bible-Belt state," Robert Wuthnow
writes in *Rough Country*, undoubtedly the most important and
sophisticated study of Texas's long religious history (5).

Wuthnow's most immediate contribution, perhaps, is simply to wrench
Texas history out from under itself. Texas is too often the orphan child
of American historiography. If historians of American religion have
pored over southern California's fundamentalist fiefdoms, for instance,
they have devoted comparatively little sustained attention to the state
that in this infant century alone has already given the nation George W.
Bush's faith-based presidency, Rick Perry's political prayer rallies,
Ted Cruz's Tea Party obstructionism, and Christian nationalist David
Barton's perpetual war on American history standards. And yet, rather
than studying Texas for its peculiarities, Wuthnow believes "Texas is
better imagined as a case study in which much that characterizes all of
America---albeit refracted differently in each locale---can be seen"
(444--445).

Wuthnow writes with a confidence born of experience. He hardly feels
compelled to shoehorn religion into a leading historical
role---preferring rather, a "more complex story" (371). As a
sociologist, he "eschew[s] the idea of grand empirical generalizations
and focus[es] greater attention on the complexity of social processes
and the contextual contingencies involved" (457). He wants to see how
religion, race, politics, and power interweave, and he believes a
state-level study can look at the "particular social circumstances in
which religious developments occur" (482). Thus, in *Rough Country*,
religion alternately shapes and is shaped by broader trends and social
forces. When surveying 150 years of racial inequality, for instance,
Wuthnow observes, "religion was seldom a determining factor in any of
these policies but contributed to all of them" (445). In reference to
the cultural turmoil of the 1960s, Wuthnow explains, "religion was
neither the leader that some hoped it would be nor the laggard that it
often seemed" (302).

And yet, for all of its 654 pages, *Rough Country* is still a mad dash
through a century and a half of Texas religious history. Drawing mostly
from contemporary daily newspaper accounts, Wuthnow's narrative
generally follows the state's white Protestant establishment and its
rotating cast of male leaders through issues, controversies,
organizations, institutions, political candidates, and elections:
churches are built; schools and denominational structures are organized;
segregation is codified; lynching becomes epidemic; prohibition is won
and lost; fundamentalism is fostered; dispensationalism is created and
promulgated; evolution is fought; Al Smith's 1928 presidential bid is
defeated; religious welfare organizations struggle to stem the effects
of economic collapse; clergymen preach against communism; farmworkers
protest; revivalists spark a Cold War religion; anxious observers worry
about public morality; leaders hesitate to embrace civil rights; the
appearance of integration, abortion, homosexuality, and women's rights
fuel reaction; religious leaders reinterpret "liberty of conscience" as
an offensive political tool; and activists move into the electoral arena
behind Ronald Reagan and two George Bushes before exploding into Tea
Party politics. Throughout it all, debates about morality are argued,
racial divisions are drawn, moral standards are proffered, and a world
is redefined by its faith.

Wuthnow approaches Texas history in part on its own folkloric terms. He
argues that nineteenth-century Texans confronted a vast "rough country,"
a harsh land lacking in infrastructure, wracked by disease, and ravaged
by lawlessness. In the struggle against this seeming "roughness,"
Wuthnow writes, the state became a wilderness to be won for
civilization, morality, and God. Wuthnow's Texans, then, are
self-proclaimed civilizers rather than pioneers. They are, in his
account, institution-builders borne along on a "sea of uncertainty and
danger" (53). And out of their struggles emerged the habits and mindsets
that set patterns for the future. Importantly, not only the "harsh
realities of frontier life," but racial anxieties in the aftermath of
abolition and the political turmoil of Reconstruction imbued white
religious leaders with the particular faith that they carried through
150 years of clumsy racial entanglements (448).

While Wuthnow's episodic narrative ranges widely across time, it
nevertheless returns to key themes: the tragedy of American race
relations, the continual redefinition and deployment of moral norms, the
enduring power of Southern Baptists, the belief in a "liberty of
conscience," the allure of politics, and the never-ending evolution of
standards for the creation of an "us" and a "them." Yet despite ample
opportunities, Wuthnow attributes few hateful or malicious motives to
his subjects. Far less strident than its subtitle suggests, this work
will disappoint those who expect a train of radical conservative
provocateurs. Instead, Wuthnow typically portrays his subjects as
earnest and sincere. In his telling, social tragedies seem most often
born of unforeseen consequences rooted in a myopic "rough country"
individualism ill-suited for anything other than a nineteenth-century
frontier.

By pulling Texas's peculiar history into a national narrative, Wuthnow
hopes to shift dominant accounts of American religious history in ways
that can accommodate Texas's peculiar experience. Wuthnow's sweeping
history is, of course, not a complete account of Texas's religious
history, either in its chronology or in the diversity of its subjects.
But then, it is not meant to be. Wuthnow seeks instead to account for
the raw power of Texas's red state religion and he has undertaken that
massive task with all of the skill expected of such an accomplished
scholar.
