---
author: 'Andrew R. McKee'
author-first: 'Andrew R.'
author-last: McKee
author-note: |
    Andrew R. McKee is a Ph.D. student in American religious history at
    Florida State University.
book-reviewed: |
    Chad E. Seales. <em>The Secular Spectacle: Performing Religion in a
    Southern Town</em>. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2013. 256 pp.  
    ISBN: 9780199860289.
layout: article
title: 'Review: The Secular Spectacle'
vol: 16
year: 2014
...

*The Southern Spectacle* opens with the enticing visual claim that
"Southern Secularism is a greasy pig." Chad Seales attempts to catch
this greasy pig to illuminate the shifting and overlapping territories
of movement and migration within the public spaces of a specific locale.
While Seales notes that "the subject is elusive, and easily slips the
grasp," he corrals it enough to examine the historical arch of boundary
contestation and creation of civil society in an industrial town (1).
Siler City, North Carolina is effectively a microcosm in which the
interplay between private and public contests of morality over sex,
race, religion, and secularism become visible.

Seales crafts a vivid and lively narrative from historical documents,
ethnography, and close attention to theorization. From these different
sites, Seales claims that, "Siler City residents participated in
performances of religion *and* projects of secularism; their
participation revealed social interests as it displayed social status,
and the relationship between their performances of religion and their
projects of secularism changed over time" (10). His argument combines
recent popular works on secularism with spatial theories to position the
categories of religious and secular in a spatial relationship that
highlights how these classifications are mutually defined and performed
with and against one another in a particular place. From this invaluable
perspective, he highlights performances of power through religion and
secularism.

The book is organized roughly chronologically, but it moves thematically
to outline the contours of southern secularism alongside the social
patterns of Protestant belief and religious language that arose within
and across local neighborhoods.

From the engaging historiographical introduction, Seales drops the
reader into "shifting territory" on the streets of historic Siler City.
Chapter One, "Industry," traces the interplay between southern
regionalism, secularism, and industry around the Reconstruction era.
Seales introduces Siler City as a rapidly growing area that was both
connected to, yet "relatively unaffected" by, Reconstruction (25).
Racial tensions often manifested in the shared industrial spaces of the
city. Seales argues that religion became a key and powerful marker for
white control of an area increasingly defined by "smokestacks and
steeples." Chapter Two, "Nationalism," highlights this tension in public
performances of Fourth of July parades. These parades highlight how
white residents of the city sanctified memories of the Old South,
redeemed southern conceptions of religious sacrifice, and then projected
them as a form of secular American patriotism. Seales points to white
performances, done in "Black Face" as late as the 1950s, to highlight
how references to a divine racial order were proclaimed without the
direction assertion of religion.

Chapters Three and Four are informed by these theoretical and historical
backgrounds and move the book into an examination of the dissolving of,
and disillusion with, elite whites' visions of southern progressivism.
Seales argues that in the early twentieth century, "elite whites
cultivated civility as an institutional mechanism of southern
secularism, defining it in opposition to the religious rite of mob
lynching" (68). This mode of creating secularism, especially at City
Hall and the County Courtroom, allowed Siler City to connect its version
of progressivism to regional and national trends. In marking lynching as
a "primitive religious rite," civil leaders "leveraged" the category of
civility to enforce a religiously justified racial order (86). Chapter
Four, "Privatization," again highlights this stark racial divide by
showing how in the 1970s, the Fourth of July parade moved from the
streets of the city to the backyard of Tommy Emerson. In 2006, Seales
attended this picnic with his wife Emily. Aided by interviews with
residents, he traces out an existing form of "de facto desegregation" in
which the discontinued parades are remembered as having "just stopped"
instead of ending because of desegregation. While desegregation
threatened the power of white masculine control over public spaces,
race, and gender, privatization cultivated a new form of secular power.
Seales concludes that in moving to a backyard, this new private affair
helps retain the social power of religion "for a select public" (113).

The final chapter, "Migration," brings Seales' narrative through the
1990s and early 2000s. This chapter moves back to the public spaces of
City Hall, the Courthouse, and public schools, as well as to new
Catholic churches constructed by Latino migrants. It weaves together the
public Good Friday performances of the imagined (by white residents)
homogenous Latino residents, the working conditions surrounding the
"industrial machine," and the shifting, contested, Protestant landscape.
A visit by former Klansman and Louisiana State Legislator David Duke in
February 2000 highlights a transformative moment in the performance of
southern secularism.

This book makes important connections between gendered white spatial and
moral power and the numerous challenges of racial segregation. Seales
highlights how dreams of southern progressivism fostered a secular
platform that masked, "racial harmony as an eternal moment" (154). This
excellent book will be of interest to scholars of southern migration,
religion, and the formation of the secular. Seales concludes, "In the
early twentieth century, southern secularism was a greasy pig. A century
later, it is a vehicle of forgetfulness" (157). *The Secular Spectacle*
is a welcome addition to the scholarship on secularism, and Seales
offers deeper reflection and analysis of its particularities in the
South.
