---
author: 'Randall M. Miller'
author-first: 'Randall M.'
author-last: Miller
author-note: 'Randall M. Miller is a professor of History at St. John''s University.'
book-reviewed: |
    Luke E. Harlow. <em>Religion, Race, and the Making of Confederate Kentucky,
    1830-1880</em>. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2014. 242pp. ISBN
    978-1-107-00089-6.
layout: article
title: |
    Review: Religion, Race, and the Making of Confederate Kentucky,
    1830-1880
vol: 16
year: 2014
...

Luke Harlow takes us deep inside the mind of conservative evangelical
Protestants in Kentucky to discover the marrow of thinking on religion,
slavery, race, and region. By looking at Kentucky, he insists, we find
the center of American debates on those issues. In that border state,
slavery ruled in law but antislavery sentiment worked on conscience, and
religious believers on all sides of the debates were in regular contact
with one another in print and even in person. What developed there, as
perhaps in no other place, was an on-going "back-and-forth
argumentation" that revealed the limits of antislavery gradualism and
the force of proslavery racism. In the end, he argues, Kentucky moved
from its initial "neutrality" on secession and support of the Union
(with slavery), to being an unreconstructed southern "Confederate" state
after the war. That evolution showed in the ways conservative
evangelicals worked out their ideas over a half century.

Harlow largely relies on the writings of prominent preachers and public
figures among Baptists, Methodists, and Presbyterians to make his case
for the prevailing and evolving thought(s) on Kentucky's place in the
great debates on slavery, on the meaning of the Union, and on the
obligations to, and of, church and state. In his close readings of such
works, Harlow finds that in Kentucky at least antislavery gradualists
and proslavery apologists engaged in sustained arguments on how to read
the Bible, the spirituality of the church, and the uniqueness of slavery
as it had developed in a Christian republic. Gradualists sought ways to
end slavery and proslavery advocates sought ways to protect, and even,
extend it. Both sides, however, agreed that slavery as an institution
was sanctioned in the Bible, that God ordained a racial order in which
Christian whites held sway, and that immediate, universal, uncompensated
emancipation of the Garrisonian kind violated scriptural commands for an
ordered society, invited race war, and threatened Christian authority.
In a word, they thought abolitionists were dangerous heretics.

Harlow carefully tracks the various arguments with extended exegeses of
books, pamphlets, articles and editorials in religious newspapers, and
printed sermons and speeches. In doing so, he suggests that
evangelicals---conservative and other--- were almost preoccupied with
the slavery and race questions. He also asserts that such men spoke for
their congregations, and indeed for the larger evangelical public,
though he offers no evidence of public responses to their arguments. His
assumption that sermons and printed texts must have resonated in the
pews---a common claim by students of religion focusing on printed
texts---bears caution. So, too, does his fixation on the public writings
of clergy and lay church leaders, which slights the day-to-day concerns
of worship, witness, fellowship, and church-building that likely
preoccupied the people in the churches and defined their priorities
about what religion meant and must do. But, overall, his arguments make
sense, especially in light of the political and religious outcomes.
Although he devotes only a chapter to the process, Harlow shows that a
gradualist-proslavery convergence occurred during and because of the
war, when radical abolitionists supposedly took over Union policy by
driving emancipation and arming the slaves. The latter developments were
especially disruptive in the erstwhile Union state of Kentucky, for the
promise of emancipation elsewhere spurred the state's blacks to run to
Union lines and to join the Union forces in numbers that turned slavery
upside down and inside out in Kentucky, making whites there increasingly
and self-consciously "southerners." Reconstruction sealed that union of
former antislavery gradualists and proslavery advocates as they adopted
and adapted a mythology that claimed the Confederacy as a noble cause
and white southerners as God's chosen people, with all the obligations
to resist Republican radicalism and sustain a God-commanded racial order
of white over black. As Harlow has it, a "conservative religion made
Confederate Kentucky" after the war (223).

Whether Harlow's book rewrites "southern" religious history and our
understanding of the religious basis of border-state antislavery and
proslavery arguments only further work will tell. But with uncommon
skill, intelligence, and sensitivity, he has deconstructed and
re-centered the arguments of conservative evangelicals to show that for
all their differences both antislavery gradualists and proslavery
advocates worked from a common theological foundation. In doing so, he
reminds us that, in assessing religion and the slavery question, we must
not cast the story in polarities. Place matters. So, too, does process.
In that regard, Harlow's fine book invites us to investigate and observe
the dynamics of religion and politics close up and over time in other
places. Thereby, we might find the very soul of "southern" religion.
