---
author: Arthur Remillard
author-first: Arthur
author-last: Remillard
author-note: |
    Arthur Remillard is an associate professor of Religious Studies at Saint
    Francis University.
layout: article
title: |
    Reflections on <em>Southern Civil Religions</em>; or, Confessions of an
    Academic Carpetbagger
vol: 16
year: 2014
...

I teach at a Catholic school, so maybe this is why I want to begin with
a confession.

I am not a southerner. I am a Pennsylvanian by birth, the son of New
England Yankees with nary a sliver of southern shade in my family tree.
Sweet tea makes me gag, even worse than boiled peanuts do. And if given
the option between North Carolina and Texas barbeque, I wouldn't have an
opinion either way. It's all just one, big bundle of cholesterol to me.

If all of this wasn't enough, I hadn't even *heard* of Charles Reagan
Wilson's *Baptized in Blood* until my third year of graduate school at
Florida State University. I was enrolled in [Amy Koehlinger's]
[http://liberalarts.oregonstate.edu/users/amy-koehlinger] seminar on
religion and social change. If my memory is correct, [Kelly Baker][] was
assigned to begin the class with a general overview of the book. My job
was to distill her insights into a series of conversation points. That's
about all that I can recall from that day. I do know that after that
class ended, I had no intention to ever open that book again.

But then the next semester started. I was nearly finished with my course
work and had planned to write a dissertation that built upon an essay
that I wrote on the FSU mascot controversy.[^1] I pitched this to my
advisor, [John Corrigan][], who expressed a valid concern that such a
project on its own might not fly in the job market. He wisely suggested
that I gain a secondary specialty on something "more conventional."

I took his advice (always a good idea), and promptly located the path of
least resistance. Corrigan was then the editor of the *Journal of
Southern Religion*, and as his graduate assistant, I had helped with the
book reviews. This gave me a vague sense of the emerging literature in
the field (I knew, for example, that [Paul Harvey][] wasn't just a
folksy radio personality). Also, my two closest friends---[Mike
Pasquier][] and [Lee Willis][]---both had enduring interests in the
South. So I had two friendships to exploit and test the limits of.
Finally, and perhaps most pragmatically, the Florida state archives were
just up the road, well within walking distance.

With expediency guiding every decision to this point, I set forth hoping
to get a quick journal article out of all of this. Then, during my first
trip to the archives, I came upon a collection of papers belonging to a
Methodist minister, Alfred L. Woodward. A veteran of the Civil War,
Woodward worked on the railroads before becoming a well-known preacher
in north Florida. He was also an author, writing a regular column in a
Tallahassee newspaper. As I sifted through the folders, I sometimes
perceived Woodward as an ardent Lost Causer, someone who could have
easily been featured in *Baptized in Blood*. And yet elsewhere, Woodward
positioned himself as a prototypical New South progressive, a man of
education and refinement who idealized the railways and championed an
industrial economy. In these settings, I could see Woodward matching the
description of an urbane ministry chronicled in Beth Barton Schweiger's
*Gospel Working Up*.[^2]

By the end of the semester, I had written a clumsy essay that attempted
to capture this tension. It was coherent enough that Corrigan suggested
that I develop it for my dissertation. This would have been unthinkable
a few months prior. But in that moment, even before my advisor had
finished his sentence, I was in full agreement. I didn't know much about
the New South era, but that's not what caught my interest. After all, I
did not see Reverend Woodward's writings as religious because he was a
Methodist. I saw instead a person who creatively wove religious words
and imagery into the fabric of everyday events, places, and behaviors.
Yes, the Lost Cause was part of his rhetoric. But I sensed that there
were more chapters to his story and to the story of the New South more
generally.

To tell this story, though, I had to find more sources. So I hit the
road with my tent and a slender graduate student budget, traveling to
archives and sleeping in campgrounds in north Florida, south Georgia,
and south Alabama---a region that I would later call (at the prompting
of Charles Reagan Wilson, who read multiple versions of the manuscript)
the "Wiregrass Gulf South."

I quickly discovered that the archivist is the historian's best friend.
At the University of West Florida, [Dean DeBolt][] alerted me to a rich
collection of letters sent to Sidney Catts, Florida's governor from 1917
to 1921. This was a recent acquisition by DeBolt, so Wayne Flynt hadn't
seen them when he wrote a biography of the "cracker messiah."[^3] I
spent most of my time looking at letters from when Catts was campaigning
for governor. A former Baptist minister and political neophyte, Catts
made anti-Catholicism a central plank on his platform. Reading letters
from his supporters was like lurking in the comments section of an
online news story. Both are venues for the unvarnished opinions of a
public that can be even more extreme than those who they support. In
contrast, while doing research in Mobile, a diocesan archivist alerted
me to the letters of Bishop Edward E. Allen. These correspondences
revealed an increasing sense of alarm and unease among Alabama's
Catholics, as Catts's ilk gained traction in the state. The concern
skyrocketed in 1921 with the murder of [Father James E. Coyle][], and
then burst through the stratosphere during the trial and release of his
murderer.[^4]

As valuable as archivists were in my research, I was also the
beneficiary of dumb luck. In Albany, Georgia, I happened to meet
descendants of Samuel Farkas, a Jewish immigrant from Hungary who
arrived in town after the Civil War. With limited resources, Farkas
launched a mule-trading business and, within ten years, rose to become a
distinguished businessman and property owner. By the time he died in
1914, he collected rent from approximately 400 people. He also left
behind glorious legends, including a classic circus-act-gone-awry story.
When a circus lion refused to release its trainer's head, the ringmaster
begged anyone with a gun to shoot the lion. Sitting in the crowd, Farkas
didn't have a gun. But he did carry a cane, which he promptly jammed
down the lion's throat to save the day.

What I didn't hear from Farkas's descendants, nor from the archival
records, were stories of bigotry and anti-Semitism. I would encounter a
similar conspicuous silence when I wandered into the municipal archives
of Mobile and found a treasury of scrapbooks from Leon Schwarz. During
the early and mid-twentieth century, Schwarz was known among Mobile's
elite as a soldier, fraternal "joiner," businessperson, politician, and
member of the Reform synagogue. In 1929, Schwarz was elected as the
mayor of Mobile. But he was not the first Jewish mayor of the city.
Lazarus Schwarz (no relation) had won that office in 1912, and was
equally respected throughout the city.

Do I think that anti-Semitism was a problem for these and other Jews of
the era? Absolutely. As Louis Schmier has explained, the 1915 lynching
of Leo Frank "hovered like a foreboding raven about the heads of Jews,
evoking fear and insecurity."[^5] Still, I found southern white
Protestants expressing respect and admiration for their Jewish
counterparts, commenting favorably on their charitable deeds, business
acumen, and commitment to the Old Testament. Sidney Catts was one such
person. Catts called Leo Frank's principal agitator Tom Watson "the
great Apostle of Americanism"; and the Georgian likewise labeled Catts a
"friend and champion" of the white South. On matters of religious
prejudice, the two clearly found common ground in their
anti-Catholicism. But not anti-Semitism. When rumors of Catts's
anti-Semitism circulated during the governor's tenure, he moved quickly
to reject the accusation. Catts would also write an enthusiastic letter
of support for one of his Jewish friends who had applied to the Judge
Advocate General's Department during the Great War.

As the archival visits continued, my research on Catholics and Jews
combined with a scattered batch of sources on race, gender, industry,
and memory. It seemed that no matter what I found---whether it was the
origins of the Florida Chautauqua, or the unsubstantiated rumors of
African Americans meeting and planning the overthrow of the white
South---I detected the traces of religious activity.[^6] Consequently,
when I finally began writing, I had no shortage of good stories to tell.
What I lacked, though, was a golden thread to hold them all together, an
idea that would allow me to say *something* about all of this.

So I wrote, hoping that I would find the language to capture the ideas
rumbling around in my brain. I even kept a "Dissertation Diary." I
recently revisited this diary, only to find a series of informal,
unhinged summaries characterized only by an aimless search for an
adequate narrative architecture.

One entry stood out, though. In this definitive statement, I proclaimed,
"I am NOT going to use civil religion!"

Yes, Charles Reagan Wilson used this category to translate the religious
dimensions of the Lost Cause. And yes, I wanted my study to build upon
this classic work. But my graduate student friends and I laughed about
civil religion as if it were a hair band from the 1980s. Civil religion
was pass√©---a relic from a bygone era that just needed to be shelved in
a museum, or, better yet, euthanized out of compassion for this aged and
frail idea.

And yet, my crisis of clarity refused to resolve itself...until I
stumbled upon a book review in the Journal of the American Academy of
Religion. "Here is a very rare bird indeed," [Ira Chernus said][] of
Richard Hughes's Myths Americans Live By, "a new book on U.S. civil
religion, written by a credentialed scholar in the academic study of
religion. People still write about U.S. civil religion. But the academic
study of religion largely abandoned this subject years ago, and with
good reason. It had become something of a prison."

At this point, I was in complete agreement. My contention that civil
religion had seen its day was unambiguously confirmed. But as the review
continued, I saw Chernus---[perhaps unintentionally][]---leave a door
open. "We need studies of civil religion that claim no supposed
consensus but allow 'us' to speak in all our diversity," he announced.
"Perhaps we must study only civil religions, in the plural. Or, if in
the singular, we need to see civil religion as a broad, dynamic field of
contending forces rather than an imagined unified tradition."

With that, the scales fell from my eyes.

Soon I had discovered that a small but committed band of historians and
sociologists had been engaged in redirecting civil religion away from
Bellah's initial formulation. Leading the charge were N. J. Demerath and
Rhys Williams, whose 1986 article, "Civil Religion in an Uncivil
Society," encouraged scholars to be more deliberate in identifying how
"specific groups and subcultures use versions of civil religion to
frame, articulate, and legitimate their own particular political or
moral visions."[^7] Those following Demerath and Williams's lead have
set upon the task of cracking up the Humpty Dumpty of civil religion,
while refusing to put it back together again.

I noticed a similar destructive impulse animating the work of southern
religious historians, who also had been busy splitting apart the
foundational assumptions of their field. Paul Harvey identified this
trend in his 2002 historiographical essay on religion in the South after
the Civil War. Along the way, Harvey praised Wilson's *Baptized in
Blood* but then added that the book "contrasts with much of the newer
'splitter' scholarship, which emphasizes the diversity and variety."[^8]

So there it was. In both the arena of civil religion theory and southern
religious historiography, I finally had my golden thread.

But I still worried about the term, "civil religion." Its very
definition was contested to the point where Bellah stopped using it,
explaining that he "grew weary of the whole definitional debate."[^9]
Rhys Williams has also since abandoned civil religion. But they both
have said that they remain interested in the "substance" of the
category, which, as Williams told me in an e-mail, is "the moral
formulations that shape political discourse and action." Additionally,
both Bellah and Williams have framed their post-civil religion writing
using the term, "the good society."[^10]

As the title of my book would indicate, I decided to hold on to civil
religion, while mixing in the language of "the good society." After much
deliberation, I was certain that civil religion still has a place in
scholarly and popular outlets. Put another way, I concluded that civil
religion was more like Led Zeppelin than Winger. While "Stairway to
Heaven" might have been overplayed on the radio, when I listen to the
newest box set, I hear something that still resonates. I was willing to
gamble that civil religion was not a one hit wonder.

To my good fortune, civil religion has seen something of a revival since
the publication of my book, punctuated by Raymond Haberski's *God and
War*.[^11] Ray has emerged as a keen observer of this new wave of civil
religion scholarship, recently [reporting][] on a conference in Germany
that focused on the topic. After summarizing the papers, Ray recounted
an ongoing conversation that he and I have been engaged in, that civil
religion needs to move "beyond Bellah." While neither of us will deny
Bellah's importance, we also think that the category should now
transcend his infamous 1967 article. Our argument finds support from a
2004 article from Mark Silk, "Numa Pompilius and the Idea of Civil
Religion in the West." Here, Silk situates Bellah as one voice among
many stretching back to the ancients who have tried to make sense of the
religious character of a nation.

So my book came out at a good time, and captured upon a series of
intersecting forces that are shaping how historians, religious studies
scholars, sociologists, and many others are thinking about the South,
southern religion, and civil religion. Ultimately, and perhaps
paradoxically, it is my hope that future studies of civil religion leave
us with a murkier sense of what civil religion is. That is, I want
mentions of civil religion to come with a host of qualifiers, taking
careful note of the person, group, topic, and time. One person or
group's civil religious discourse is their own. Let's do them the
dignity of honoring their distinctiveness. In doing this, we will be
left with an uneven, messy, and unpredictable picture of civil
religion---one that better captures the uneven, messy, and unpredictable
realities of America.

[^1]: Arthur J. Remillard, "Holy War on the Football Field: Religion and
    the Florida State University Mascot Controversy," in *Horsehide,
    Pigskin, Oval Tracts, and Apple Pie: Essays in Sports and American
    Culture*, ed. James Vlasich (Jefferson, NC: McFarland, 2005).

[^2]: Beth Barton Schweiger, *The Gospel Working Up: Progress and the
    Pulpit in Nineteenth-Century Virginia, Religion in the South* (New
    York: Oxford University Press, 2000).

[^3]: J. Wayne Flynt, *Cracker Messiah: Governor Sidney J. Catts of
    Florida* (Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 1977).

[^4]: Sharon Davies, *Rising Road: A True Tale of Love, Race, and
    Religion in America* (New York: Oxford University Press, 2009).

[^5]: Louis Schmier, ed., *Reflections of Southern Jewry: The Letters of
    Charles Wessolowsky, 1878-1879* (Macon, GA: Mercer University Press,
    1982), 173.

[^6]: Arthur Remillard, *Southern Civil Religions: Imagining the Good
    Society in the Post-Reconstruction Era* (Athens: University of
    Georgia Press, 2011). 33-37, 67-75.

[^7]: N. J. Demerath and Rhys Williams, "Civil Religion in an Uncivil
    Society," *Annals of the American Academy* 480(July, 1985), 166.

[^8]: Paul Harvey, "Religion in the American South Since the Civil War,"
    in *A Companion to the American South*, ed. John B. Boles (Malden,
    MA: Blackwell Publishers, 2002), 394.

[^9]: Robert N. Bellah, "Comment," *Sociological Analysis* vol. 50, no.
    2 (1989), 147.

[^10]: Robert N. Bellah et al., *The Good Society* (New York: Knopf,
    1991); Rhys H. Williams, "Visions of the Good Society and the
    Religious Roots of American Political Culture," *Sociology of
    Religion* vol. 60, no. 1 (1999).

[^11]: Raymond Haberski, Jr., *God and War: American Civil Religion since
    1945* (New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press, 2012).

  [Kelly Baker]: http://www.kellyjbaker.com/about/
  [John Corrigan]: http://religion.fsu.edu/faculty_john_corrigan.html
  [Paul Harvey]: http://paulharvey.org/about/
  [Mike Pasquier]: http://uiswcmsweb.prod.lsu.edu/hss/prs/People/Religious%20Studies%20Faculty/item41175.html
  [Lee Willis]: http://www.uwsp.edu/history/pages/facultystaff/lwillis.aspx
  [Dean DeBolt]: http://libguides.uwf.edu/universityarchives
  [Father James E. Coyle]: http://www.fathercoyle.org/
  [Ira Chernus said]: http://www.colorado.edu/ReligiousStudies/chernus/CivilReligions/Readings/Review%20of%20Myths%20America%20Lives%20By.htm
  [perhaps unintentionally]: http://historynewsnetwork.org/article/146831
  [reporting]: http://s-usih.org/2014/06/with-and-without-bellah.html
