---
author: Gary Richards
author-first: Gary
author-last: Richards
author-note: |
    Gary Richards is an associate professor of English at the University of
    Mary Washington.
book-reviewed: |
    Jay Watson. <em>Reading for the Body: The Recalcitrant Materiality of
    Southern Fiction, 1893-1985</em>. Athens and London: University of Georgia
    Press, 2012. Pp. x 412. 978-0-8203-4338-9.
layout: article
title: 'Review: Reading for the Body'
vol: 16
year: 2014
...

The body is the consistent, often exhilarating focus of Jay Watson's
*Reading for the Body*. This body imprints its environs with its
fingers, projects its voice to the masses and listens to disembodied
voices, bleeds when cut by its own hands or others', suffers and dies,
flees, ails, menstruates and gestates, wages war or does not, and bears
the scars of that action. Working from the principle that "the symbolic
domain of the body offers a powerful instrument for interrogating ...
[the] domains of southern culture" (9), Watson analyzes the fiction of
seven canonical southern writers---Mark Twain, Zora Neale Hurston,
William Faulkner, Richard Wright, Katherine Anne Porter, Bobbie Ann
Mason, and Walker Percy. He aims "to help move the critical discussion
of southern literature toward a more detailed and thoroughgoing
attention to the material and cultural work performed by, through, and
on southern bodies" (23).

To frame his engaging and persuasive close readings, Watson draws on an
impressive array of theorists and their "versions of materialism." The
most enabling of these are "the Marxist and neo-Marxist thought of
Althusser and Colette Guillaumin" and "the material culture theory and
philosophy of the somatic developed by Elaine Scarry" (24-25). Watson
also draws eclectically on the work of historians and fellow literary
critics, with Patricia Yaeger's *Dirt and Desire: Reconstructing
Southern Women's Writing, 1930-1990* (2000) and its complementary
publications deemed the "truest precursor" (24) of *Reading for the
Body*. Watson writes for fellow scholars of southern literature and
smartly weaves into the study most of the energizing
twenty-first-century debates within this subfield of American literary
history; however, this incorporation makes for a densely allusive
study---in both the main text and the 43 pages of notes---that may give
justified pause to readers outside the subfield.

Launched by a nuanced reading of Jean Toomer's "Portrait in Georgia,"
Watson argues that depictions of the southern body expose the "lifeless
condition of U.S. political subjectivity" (11), what Russ Castronovo
deems "necro citizenship" (11), and have done so since the colonial era.
In particular, Watson's brief survey of the literary terrain leading up
to 1893 spotlights the "hypermaterialized" (14) southern bodies of
slavery, the frontier, and disability that cast the region as "a zone of
temporal anteriority and developmental alterity" (11) to the abstracted
national whole.

Watson organizes his chapters by author and chronology. In the first two
he engagingly places southern bodies alongside modern technologies.
Chapter 1 reads hands in Twain's *Puddin'head Wilson* (1894) as largely
"instruments of self-alienation, self-dispossession, and
self-destruction" (85-86) within cultural circulations of fingerprinting
and palmistry, and Chapter 2 reads voices in Hurston's *Jonah's Gourd
Vine* (1934) and often-neglected *Moses, Man of the Mountain* (1939)
within circulations of the phonograph and the radio. Chapter 3
interrogates the shifting racialized resonances of blood in Faulkner's
*Light in August* (1932); Chapter 4 convincingly argues that, over the
course of the stories in Wright's *Uncle Tom's Children* (1940), "pain
becomes an active, even creative force in the construction of black
subjects and in the struggle for black citizenship" (213); and Chapter 5
explores women's "difficult embodiment" (217), especially within
evolving cultural understandings of tuberculosis and influenza, in
Porter's Miranda stories. Finally, Chapter 6 sympathetically reads the
quest of Mason's young female protagonist in *In Country* (1985) to
understand the body traumatized by war, arguing that she, like all
Americans, "is already a militarized and militarizing figure" (289).
Watson's coda presents Percy's *Lancelot* (1977) as a cautionary tale
about privileging the body, a tale that *Reading for the Body*
consistently heeds: "For if we are never not our bodies, it is equally
true that that we are never only our bodies" (319).

Watson himself identifies the limits of his study, cautioning in his
introduction that the book, despite its length, "bears no pretense of
being an exhaustive one" (26) in either the texts or the embodiments
interrogated. The desiring body, much less the queer desiring body, for
instance, is notably absent, as is the southern body outside a reified
black/white racial dichotomy. Likewise, Watson stresses that "*Reading
for the Body* is as much critical casebook as scholarly monograph" (27),
and, despite the introduction's provocative assertions, the study does
not forcefully draw conclusions about what these representations as a
whole may say about the South. Finally, the book's long gestation seems
to have fostered awkward moments, with Watson's now-dated frame of the
AIDS pandemic for his chapter on blood in *Light in August* being
perhaps the most obvious.

As a set of discrete, nuanced, and eloquent readings of southern bodies,
however, *Reading for the Body* is among the finest in contemporary
southern literary studies, and Watson's work stands shoulder to shoulder
with Kathaleen E. Amende's *Desire and the Divine: Feminine Identity in
White Southern Women's Writing* (2013), Edward E. Baptist's *The Half
Has Never Been Told: Slavery and the Making of American Capitalism*
(2014), and other recent studies that insistently keep southern bodies
at the heart of discussions about the region.
