---
author: Peter Slade
author-first: Peter
author-last: Slade
author-note: 'Peter Slade is a professor of Religious Studies at Ashland University.'
book-link: 'https://global.oup.com/academic/product/christians-and-the-color-line-9780199329502?q=978-0-19-932950-2&lang=en&cc=us'
book-reviewed: |
    J. Russell Hawkins and Phillip Luke Sinitiere, eds. <em>Christians and
    the Color Line: Race and Religion after Divided by Faith</em>. New
    York: Oxford University Press, 2014. 278 pp. 978-0-19-932950-2.
layout: article
title: 'Review: Christians and the Color Line'
vol: 16
year: 2014
...

It is now well over a decade since sociologists Christian Smith and
Michael O. Emerson wrote *Divided by Faith* (Oxford University Press,
2000), their landmark study of evangelical Christians' attitudes towards
race in the United States. In *Christians and the Color Line: Race and
Religion after Divided by Faith*, historians J. Russell Hawkins and
Phillip Luke Sinitiere gather together a series of essays by
sociologists, historians and theologians that consider the significance
of Smith and Emerson's work and offer continued research in the area of
race and religion in America.

It is worth briefly revisiting Smith and Emerson's work to understand
the value of this volume. In *Divided by Faith*, the two sociologists
concluded that African American and white evangelicals are less likely
to have common ground when it comes to understanding the causes and
possible solutions to racial inequality than their non-church-going
neighbors and, furthermore, that evangelicals are actually increasing
the racial divisions within American society, even as they work for
"racial reconciliation." Operating from a position of racial isolation,
evangelicals approach questions of race using their particular free
will-individualist cultural toolkit. Put simply, evangelicals believe
individuals are fully answerable for their personal sins and so they
find it hard to see, let alone address, systemic injustice. Solutions
will focus on improving relationships between individuals. White
evangelicals are unlikely to have their perspective challenged or
modified because the more ardent their faith then the more time they
spend at their churches, which are usually racially hyper-segregated
communities.

The recent findings by sociologists and historians writing in
*Christians and the Color Line* support this thesis. Ryan J. Cobb's
follows up Emerson's research with more recent polling data and draws
the same conclusions. Mark T. Mulder shows, in a fascinating study of
worship services, just how racially and socially isolated evangelicals'
worship practices are. Historian Miles S. Mullin II wades through
neo-evangelical periodicals from the 1940s and 1950s to better
understand the nature of racialized evangelical theology, and Brantley
W. Gasaway offers a parallel history of progressive evangelicals since
the 1960s.

Like most collections by multiple authors, the essays do not make a
single argument, and the editors include the necessary disclaimers in
their introduction. However, the pieces do implicitly raise a common
question about the role of Christian congregations in contributing to
and in addressing systemic injustice. In *Divided by Faith*, Emerson and
Smith suggested that the way forward for evangelicals lay in involvement
in interracial networks. Indeed, Emerson's subsequent work has moved
beyond description to the prescription of multiracial/multiethnic
congregations as a way of addressing the inequities of America's
racialized society (see Emerson, *People of the Dream: Multi Racial
Congregations in the United States* [Princeton, 2006]). This possibility
of a constructive role for congregations implicit in *Divided by Faith*,
combined with its clear analysis and devastating critique of the
evangelical church, made this sociological text required reading for any
evangelical interested in "urban" ministry, social justice, and racial
reconciliation.

Smith and Emerson's work simultaneously condemned evangelical
congregations as part of the problem and held up multiracial evangelical
congregations as a possible solution, and this tension runs through
*Christians and the Color Line*. Mullins writes of white evangelicals in
1950, "For them, hope did not lay in the vision of a 'beloved
community,' but a 'beloved church'" (31). He could well have been
writing about some of the contributors to this book. A number of the
chapters in *Christians and the Color Line* seek to place scholarship in
the service of restoring the possibility of the beloved church after the
drubbing it received at the hands of Smith and Emerson. In his chapter
on the history of Community Mennonite Church in Chicago, Tobin Miller
Shearer argues for multiracial congregations and the benefits of
interracial relationalism. Three chapters later, Edward J. Blum places a
new hope for evangelical congregations in the growing number of
multiracial families in America.

This interdisciplinary volume displays the fault-lines between
sociology, history, and theology. Exceptional characters and communities
draw the attention of theologians and historians. Here we find the good
stories of bravery, perseverance against the odds, prophetic action, and
the hope of redemption (even for America's hyper-segregated churches).
Karen Joy Johnson, for example, contributes a wonderful study of
Friendship House. This story of a radical interracial movement in the
Catholic Church in Chicago in the 1930s and 1940s gives us new heroes
(Ann Harrington, Ellen Tarry, Catherine de Hueck) and a villain
(Archbishop Mundelein).

Sociologists, on the other hand, do not focus on stories of prophetic
action. By definition, prophets are statistical outliers. Sociologists
tend to be more skeptical of the contribution multiracial congregations
make to the dismantling of a racialized and inequitable society. Jerry
Z. Park shows how, in many instances, Asian Americans have reinforced
racialized attitudes of churchgoers in multiracial congregations. Erica
Wong shows how, even in multiracial congregations, interracial
friendships must be central to the mission of the congregation;
otherwise, members continue to be racially isolated. In the final
excellent chapter, Korie Edwards seeks to disabuse the reader of the
notion that multiracial congregations are in some way a silver bullet to
slay the monster of America's racialized society. Multiracial
congregations are nothing new; they are as old as America's original
sin. Even if an evangelical church is successful in fostering these
networks of interracial friendships, Edwards demonstrates how today this
relational emphasis often distracts from, rather than leads to, demands
for racial justice.

Oddly, given the title, none of the chapters actually considers the
influence that Smith and Emerson's book has had on evangelical churches
over the last fourteen years and whether the reception of the book
itself has in any way improved on its dismal prognosis.

The contributors to *Christians and the Color Line* have written in a
clear and accessible style for the non-specialist, and the editors
should be congratulated. Importantly, while *Divided by Faith*
specifically considered the divide between white and African American
evangelicals, this book expands the consideration of race to include
Asian American and Hispanic Christians. This solid collection of essays
contains some real gems; it is a significant and useful for anyone
interested in the history and sociology of race and religion in the
United States.
