---
author: Craig Slaven
author-first: Craig
author-last: Slaven
author-note: |
    Craig Slaven is a Ph.D. candidate in English at the University of
    Kentucky.
book-reviewed: |
    Anthony Dyer Hoefer. <em>Apocalypse South: Judgment, Cataclysm, and
    Resistance in the Regional Imaginary</em>. Columbus: Ohio State
    University Press, 2012. 208 pages. ISBN 978-0814212011.
layout: article
title: |
    Review: Apocalypse South: Judgment, Cataclysm, and Resistance in the
    Regional Imaginary
vol: 16
year: 2014
...

Apocalypse South examines the various rhetorical applications of
apocalypse in the works of William Faulkner, Richard Wright, Randall
Kenan, and Dorothy Allison. By focusing on apocalyptic rhetoric, Hoefer
recovers the concept of apocalypse as a prevalent yet often neglected
southern idiom. Toward that end, the author brings a fresh perspective
to works whose form and content we might not otherwise have considered
apocalyptic.

While primarily literary criticism, the book will appeal to readers with
a broader interest in southern cultural history. Throughout, Hoefer
considers an array of extraliterary material and cultural artifacts that
frequently invoke apocalypse, such as popular and folk music, sermons,
and political speeches. He also explores various contextual passages,
including the tragic legacy of lynching reflected in Light in August,
the anti-nationalist views of Seventh Day Adventist millennialism that
influenced Wright, the elusive histories of maroon colonies in Kennan's
fictional world, and the mobilizing gospel circuits of Bastard Out of
Carolina. Notably, the epilogue shows how "the discourses of cataclysm
and destruction, rebirth and renewal, judgment and justice have been
indispensable in the rhetoric of postdiluvian New Orleans" (156).

Hoefer argues that the discourse of apocalypse offers alternative and
subversive ways of speaking in a region and culture obsessed with the
manners and rules of etiquette. Apocalypse, he writes, provides "a
vocabulary of images and narrative structures ideally suited to
articulate a variety of southern histories that threaten the stability
of the prevailing discourses of southern community." In contrast to
these more liberating possibilities, however, "the rhetoric of God's
judgment" can also become "a powerful tool of marginalization when it is
invoked to condemn those who might violate the prevailing social order"
(3-4).

Light in August uses these opposing terms of apocalypse to interpret the
story of Joe Christmas, whose ambiguous racial identity threatens the
southern white community's essentialist view that individuals are either
black or white. Hoefer reads Christmas' murder as a ritual sacrifice
that rids the community of this challenge to its apparently stable
racial boundaries. The narrative of sacrifice also reveals the inherent
contradiction of apocalypse, as "the community's insistence on an
absolutely binary social and racial order, even when faced with evidence
of the epistemological limitations of their bivalent worldview,"
precipitates cataclysm (23-24).

Whereas Faulkner's novel primarily invokes apocalypse as a means of
condemnation and damnation, Wright's Uncle Tom's Children suggests a
more emancipatory application. According to Hoefer, this cycle of short
stories demonstrates how an apocalyptic sense of time offers "the
possibility of making sense of black suffering, at least provisionally,
by locating these horrific experiences into a coherent historical
narrative" (81). In developing this argument, Hoefer tries to amend a
recurring problem in the extant criticism of Wright's early fiction.
"[T]he notion that Wright's work rejects religion," he writes, "is so
commonplace that it continues to play a determinative role in the
critical reception of his work" (62). Yet, Hoefer reminds us, both
apocalyptic millennialism and Marxism project a scripted future in which
the established order of the present is ruptured and subsequently
restructured. These two distinct influences on Wright's worldview merge,
at moments, into a vision of resistance that is neither fully Marxist
nor fully apocalyptic.

Part II of the book shifts focus to two late-century novels: Kenan's A
Visitation of Spirits and Allison's Bastard Out of Carolina. Kenan's
novel is set in the fictional town of Tims Creek, a predominantly black
community. But while its residents "have been relatively successful in
their efforts to create a black-controlled space," Hoefer explains,
"that space is itself ultimately restrictive" (109). Through the shared
experiences of suffering, a "collective identity" has emerged, but that
communal sense of self is now maintained by apocalyptically-charged
condemnations of internal dissent. Originally unified by resistance, the
new community defaults to a patriarchal structure that undermines the
development of a heterogeneous black community---a particularly
devastating consequence for Horace, the central character whose
homosexuality precludes his full participation in the fold. According to
Hoefer, Kenan's fiction suggests how apocalyptic discourse might be
repurposed, "not in order to maintain a stable identity but rather in
order to create a usable history that will guide these exchanges and
that will be accessible to all who wish to claim it" (129).

Similar to Horace, Allison's central character, Bones, is torn between a
yearning for independence and community, as she "struggles between a
claustrophobic desire to escape the marginal spaces inhabited by the
Boatwrights (which results in alienation from the family) and a longing
for a communion with them" (140). As with the other narratives,
apocalypse here offers what the dominant discourse cannot,
"function[ing] as the only narrative realm sufficient to articulate
[...] Bones' suffering." While such invocations seem little consolation
in the absence of direct action, apocalypse nonetheless provides a
viable alternative to the "discourses of discipline and punishment"
which "have only worked to enact the abjection of the Boatwrights
heretofore. Calling upon them now to mete out their retribution," Hoefer
concludes, "would ultimately reinforce their white trash identity."
Despite the apparent inefficacy of apocalyptic fantasy to incite real
change, it does provide characters like Bones with "the spiritual and
psychological sustenance" they need to endure oppression so that they
might one day rise above it (152).

One final note: Apocalypse South comes as the first installment of Ohio
State University Press's critical series, "Literature, Religion, and
Postsecular Studies." One of the aims of this series is to investigate
"the emerging identity of postsecular studies" (189). While Hoefer does
not explicitly attempt to define this protean body of scholarship, he
does implicitly engage with some of the concerns often attributed to it.
Postsecular studies contend for alternative epistemologies, discourses,
and cultural narratives whose meanings are never adequately perceived or
represented by the empiricism and rationalism of Western secular
thought. Apocalyptic discourse, as posed by Hoefer, points to just such
a discursive space. It is a space "in which the unspeakable can be
addressed indirectly and where contradiction is negotiated through
deferral to a cosmological myth. Where [apocalypse] occurs," he
concludes, "something has been silenced" (127). While this type of
critical "excavation" inevitably remains a secular exercise, it does
demonstrate the possibility of postsecular studies as a more perceptive
approach to understanding religious discourse without needing to reduce
it to some external theoretical analogue. As this study attests,
understanding the discourse of apocalypse demands a new theoretical
vocabulary that is derived from, and not simply applied to, apocalyptic
narratives.
