---
author: 'Samuel C. Smith'
author-first: 'Samuel C.'
author-last: Smith
author-note: |
    Samuel C. Smith is an associate professor of History at Liberty
    University.
book-reviewed: |
    Thomas J. Little, <em>[The Origins of Southern Evangelicalism: Religious
    Revivalism in the South Carolina Lowcountry, 1670-1760](http://www.sc.edu/uscpress/books/2013/7274.html)</em>. Columbia: 
    University of South Carolina Press, 2013. 280 pp. ISBN
    978-1-611-17274-4.
layout: article
title: 'Review: The Origins of Southern Evangelicalism'
vol: 16
year: 2014
...

Until recently, scholars of the colonial Lowcountry South have seldom
presented the region as deeply religious, much less as puritan or
evangelical. Thomas J. Little's *The Origins of Southern Evangelicalism*
illustrates just how wrong that assessment has been. Roots of religious
revivalism came with Carolina's earliest permanent settlements. From the
religious tolerance embedded in the colony's founding document
(Fundamental Constitutions) to the transmission of puritan influences
from New England and the Caribbean, to the influx of European pietism,
Little methodically lays out the development of an evangelical
foundation among Carolina dissenters and Anglicans alike. Well
researched and written, this impressive book leaves few stones unturned,
demonstrating the early and sometimes pervasive presence of revivalist
religion in the colonial South. Long before the proto-typical
nineteenth-century southern revivals, evangelicalism flourished in South
Carolina.

Little's careful analysis of contextual details yields valuable insight
on the Lowcountry's complicated religious landscape. For example, he
clarifies how the Test and Church Acts (1704, 1706) were both positive
and negative for evangelicals in South Carolina. While the original
intent of the 1704 Test Act was to help High Anglicans gain the
ascendancy, the effort backfired. This act so strongly regulated
non-Anglicans that it drove latitudinarian moderates into dissenter
churches, increasing their majority. Later in that same year, an
establishment act passed, creating six parishes with "a sort of
Presbyterian church government from below" (61). While this act
empowered Anglican laymen over clergy, dissenters saw it as detrimental,
since it gave their Anglican equals a political advantage. Dissenters
successfully lobbied to rescind both acts. Although the new 1706 Church
Act gave evangelical dissenters a place at the political table, it
"checked the growth of dissenting Protestantism" for a time by virtue of
a settled establishment (49). Nevertheless, dissenters would keep coming
to the colony (especially after 1720), bringing their evangelical tenets
with them.

One of the most important developments toward building South Carolina's
pluralistic society was Governor Nathaniel Johnson's township plan
(1731). Designed to make the colony more secure by bringing in
Protestant immigrants, the plan enhanced "an ever-widening stream of
pluralistic Christian expression" and "engendered an important shift in
the ecclesiastical balance of the colony" (83). Yet, as Little shows,
the dissenter presence was so pronounced, even prior to the township
plan, that some denominations were dividing up into New and Old Light
camps, evidence of an active awakening ethos a decade before the First
Great Awakening.

Little's placement of George Whitefield into the context of an already
ensconced evangelical presence is especially helpful. The famed
controversy between Whitefield and Alexander Garden, South Carolina's
commissary for the Bishop of London and St. Philip's rector, was not so
much a new battle for Garden---who had long engaged dissenters
theologically---but an old one with new clothes (Whitefield was an
evangelical Anglican!). Not only did Garden feel the need to keep
dissenters at bay for the sake of Anglican hegemony, he had to figure
out how to minimize "the spell Whitefield had cast over his [own] flock"
at St. Philips (131). Charleston and the surrounding region were ripe
for heart-felt religion, not because Whitefield was preaching something
new, but because he was bringing full circle something robustly
familiar.

Typically understood, revivalism, insofar as it impacted the colonial
South, was more disruptive than harmonious. Although Little documents
the battles, he rightly shows that evangelical religion actually
promoted consensus. Even as early as the 1720s, "there was a decided
turn toward inward, experiential faith . . . giving rise to the
formation of a new religious synthesis and sowing the seeds for the
Great Awakening" (185-186). As tumultuous as events swirling around
Whitefield seemed, his evangelical message helped enhance a "cooperative
ideal" (186).

Scholarly and accessible, this work strikes a balance of breadth and
depth. While Little covers a vast range of mainline and radical groups
over an even broader space of time (1670-1760), he provides an
impressive depth of analysis throughout. He takes the reader deep into
church records, books, sermons, and pamphlets. Although one can get
bogged down with these excursions, the benefit is well worth the effort.
Possibly no single volume to date provides a more thorough documentary
examination on both seventeenth and eighteenth-century religion in the
Lowcountry South, making *The Origins of Southern Evangelicalism* a must
read for the student of early American religious history.
