[![image](../index_top_logo_.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/).

[![image](../index_top.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/)

![image](../../production/page_2_strip.jpg)

[![image](../New_Vol_13.png)](Front13.html)

Archive Volume XIII (2011) Volume XII (2010) Volume XI (2009) Katrina
(2009) Volume X (2007) Volume IX (2006) Volume VIII (2005) Volume VII
(2004) Volume VI (2003) Volume V (2002) Volume IV (2001) Volume III
(2000) Volume II (1999) Volume I (1998) Main Page

[![image](../page_2_link_4_mast.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/ed.htm)

[![image](../page_2_link_5_ed_policies.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/mission.htm)

[![image](../page_2_link_6_article_sub.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/submit.htm)

[![image](../page_2_link_7_book_rev.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/reviews.htm)

[![image](../page_2_link_8_hill_award.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/award.htm)

[![image](../page_2_link_9_advertisers.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/ads.htm)

[![image](../page_2_link_99_email.jpg)](mailto:aremillard@francis.edu)

![image](../../production/page_2_width_line_side.jpg) \
.

![image](../../production/page_2_width_line_top.jpg)

* * * * *

![image](Reviews/SpiritofRebellion.jpg)

Jarod Roll. *Spirit of Rebellion: Labor and Religion in the New Cotton
South*. Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 2010. 266 pp.
978-0-252-07703-6. Reviewed by Lauren Beaupre for the *Journal of
Southern Religion*.

* * * * *

In 1939, over 200 black and white farmers gathered along the Missouri
roadside to protest government policies that favored corporate farmers
at the expense of tenant farmers. Because of their protest, along with
pressure from the growing rural labor movement, the federal government
created New Deal programs that provided housing, subsistence plots of
land, and better diets to landless farmers. In the long run, however,
these small farmers were unable to reclaim the independent agricultural
success they longed for in the New Cotton South.

Only one generation before, the promise of a successful farming career
drew over 125,000 white and black migrants to the Missouri Bootheel.
These migrants viewed the area as a potential "Canaan" that would
include a series of small, independently-owned farms. In contrast, the
capitalists who transformed Missouri's landscape into fertile farmland
had different ambitions; they sought rapid, mechanized, commercial
development—their own "Jerusalem." As a result of these competing
visions, life was hard for Missouri's migrants, both black and white.
Their shared difficulties, however, did not initially draw white and
black farmers together in common cause, but rather deepened the racial
divide.

* * * * *

"Jarod Roll argues that they were united by a common agarian worldview
and mobilized by a prophetic religion."

* * * * *

How then did white and black farmers unite in protest by 1939? Jarod
Roll argues that they were united by a common agrarian worldview and
mobilized by a prophetic religion. More specifically, he claims that
blacks and whites drew upon a long tradition of Christian thought to
forge a shared belief in "producerism," the notion that a person is
entitled to the fruits of his or her own labor. In turn, Roll reveals
how a Pentecostal-Holiness belief in the power of the Holy Spirit
allowed both blacks and whites to proffer an effective defense of their
agrarian worldview.

Too often, scholars characterize prophetic religion as merely
"otherworldly." Yet, in a similar vein to David Chappell's *A Stone of
Hope: Prophetic Religion and the Death of Jim Crow*(2004)*,*Roll
demonstrates how prophetic religion served as a catalyst to political
action. He explains, "Whether agrarian rebels pursued the socialist
cooperative commonwealth, a black nation, or New Deal policies that
would assure 'the things that God prepared for us from the foundation of
the world,' they did so inspired at least in part by a prophetic
religion that was democratic, oppositional, and explosive" (7). In
contrast to Chappell, however, Roll demonstrates the ways in which
prophetic religion encouraged political engagement for both blacks and
whites.

* * * * *

"Roll successfully interweaves the history of both blacks and whites in
the Missouri Bootheel."

* * * * *

Indeed, this is one of the great strengths of the book: Roll
successfully interweaves the history of both blacks and whites in the
Missouri Bootheel. In doing so, he makes an important contribution to
religious studies, and in particular, the study of southern religion,
where scholarly topics are too often divided along racial lines.

Yet, what makes Roll's book about Missouri of particular interest to
scholars of the South? Roll uses the Missouri Bootheel to tell the
larger story of the New Cotton South. He argues that the Missouri
Bootheel provides an early example of modernization in the cotton
industry, which revolutionized areas from Arkansas' lowlands to
Mississippi's Delta to Louisiana's bayous and set the stage for
conflicts between capitalists and farmers that would spread through
places like Texas and Arizona all the way to west coast in California.

As a historian, Roll primarily engages the literature of his field.
Essentially, he provides the rural, southern counterpart to Lizabeth
Cohen's classic work *Making a New Deal: Industrial Workers in Chicago,
1919-1939* (1990)*.* At the same time, *Spirit of Rebellion* takes its
place among recent, noteworthy books such as Bethany Moreton's *To Serve
God and Wal-Mart: The Making of Christian Free Enterprise*(2010) that
explore the ways in which people link their religious faith to their
economic interests.

The importance of Roll's narrative is almost self-evident. He aptly
demonstrates that prophetic religion "empowered believers to fashion a
new 'moral community.' It enabled the children of white supremacists and
black nationalists to come together on the roadsides in 1939 and make
demands on the New Deal state" (10). He then suggests that the eventual
decline of hard-won New Deal reforms led many tenant and small farmers
to migrate to cities such as Chicago and Memphis where they used their
experiences in rural areas to inform their engagement in urban labor and
civil rights movements. Clearly, Roll has uncovered a story worth
telling.

  -----------------------------
  Lauren Beaupre
  Doctoral Student in History
  University of Notre Dame
  -----------------------------

**[Search *The Journal of Southern
Religion*](http://jsr.fsu.edu/search.htm)**

.

.

This site was designed by Randall J. Stephens and is maintained by Emily
Clark. © 1998-2011 by \
 *The Journal of Southern Religion*. All rights reserved. ISSN 1094-5253
