---
layout: article
title: "Review: Wingless Chickens, Bayou Catholics, and Pilgrim
Wayfarers"
author: Stephanie Bilinsky
author-note: "Stephanie Bilinsky is a doctoral student in religious
studies at Arizona State University."
vol: 13
year: 2011
book-reviewed: "Lamar L. Nisly. <em>Wingless Chickens, Bayou Catholics, and Pilgrim
Wayfarers: Constructions of Audience and Tone in O'Connor, Gautreaux,
and Percy</em>. Macon: Mercer University Press, 2011. 254 pp. ISBN
978-0-88146-214-2."
---

Flannery O'Connor, Tim Gautreaux, and Walker Percy are all southern
Catholic writers, but each uses distinct tones in addressing their
audiences. In *Wingless Chickens, Bayou Catholics, and Pilgrim
Wayfarers: Constructions of Audience and Tone in O'Connor, Gautreaux,
and Percy*, L. Lamar Nisly explores the various differences in these
writers' fiction. O'Connor, Gautreaux, and Percy exhibit understandings
of their audiences shaped by their local experiences of Catholicism as
well as the transformations of the Second Vatican Council.

O'Connor, the subject of an extensive body of literary criticism, is
known for her use of the grotesque to shock readers. Nisly provides an
analysis of O'Connor's biography as well as her own comments on audience
in interviews and various correspondences to illuminate O'Connor's
perception of herself as a prophet to an unbelieving audience, or
"wingless chickens" (27). According to Nisly, O'Connor's opinion of her
audience emerges from her experience of isolation in the small Catholic
community of Milledgeville, Georgia, and her ambivalent attitude toward
the changes of Vatican II, especially as they pertained to ecumenical
openness. A theological conservative for much of her life, O'Connor
found she had more in common with her fundamentalist Protestant
neighbors in the Bible Belt than she did with many of her fellow
Catholics. Nevertheless, O'Connor remained focused on the centrality of
the Catholic Church.

Nisly demonstrates the ways in which O'Connor's assumption of a hostile
audience shapes her novels and short stories. The grotesque serves as an
important tool with which O'Connor reveals what she perceived as the
degradations of the twentieth century while opening a space for a sense
of the Christian divine. Nisly benefits greatly from the letters and
essays O'Connor left behind in which she explained the theological
intentions of her stories. These writings also illuminate how O'Connor's
Catholicism influenced her negotiation of the then-popular New
Criticism, which required authors to dramatize material as opposed to
overtly narrating. O'Connor worked to combine effective dramatization
and narration in order to convey Catholic moral messages without
alienating her presumed hostile audience.

Gautreaux's approach to his audience is markedly different, using humor
to explore moral choices. Unlike O'Connor's Milledgeville, Catholicism
permeated Gautreaux's southern Louisiana community. Catholicism's
pervasiveness in this part of Louisiana led Gautreaux to assume more
commonality with his audience, explaining his conversational approach.
Vatican II's influence on Gautreaux is more ambiguous than in the case
of O'Connor, and Nisly argues that Catholics in Gautreaux's Morgan City
may have viewed the ecumenical openness as less of a threat due to their
majority position in the community.

Gautreaux's fiction focuses on themes of Catholicism, community, and
family, utilizing alternately gentle and stern tones that reveal the
author's view of his audience as companions. Nisly analyzes the tone and
moral messages in several of Gautreaux's short stories and novels. While
some of these writings are more satirical than others, Nisly
consistently demonstrates how Gautreaux's characters change in the
course of his stories, unlike O'Connor's relatively static characters.
Like his upbringing, Catholicism infuses Gautreaux's fiction in
sometimes-subtle ways, in particular through his emphasis on "the
sacramentality of the ordinary" as well as responses and descriptions
(107).

Walker Percy is less easy to place than O'Connor and Gautreaux. He lived
on a metaphorical and geographical boarder of Catholic and Protestant
communities in Covington, Louisiana. A convert to Catholicism and
transplant to Louisiana, Percy viewed his role as a writer as that of
warning wayfaring readers who seem unaware of the dangers of modern
life. Nisly seems determined to explain Percy's conversion to
Catholicism as a product of the writer's relationship with a Catholic
uncle; however, the reasons for Percy's conversion and its bearing on
analysis of his work remain unclear. Percy's writing spanned Vatican II,
and he criticized laity, clergy, and women religious who challenged the
church's authority too openly.

As a convert, Percy maintained a liminal position as active member of
the Catholic Church without being fully subsumed as a "Catholic writer"
(150). In this way, he promotes Catholicism in his fiction while
critiquing the church. Nisly identifies four themes in Percy's novels:
southern aristocracy's adherence to a version of Stoicism, the limits of
science in providing life's meaning, the excesses in larger society, and
the failures of Christians to live up to their own ideals as well as the
excesses of the Catholic Church following Vatican II. These themes and
their illustrations in various novels support Nisly's argument that
Percy hopes to shock audiences out of malaise into a search for deeper
meaning; however, Percy avoids explicit statements of Christian messages
in his novels to avoid losing the attention of readers whom he believes
would benefit most from his writing.

Though attentive to the roles of geography and ecumenical developments
in O'Connor, Gautreaux, and Percy's work, Nisly tends to ignore the
influence of race and gender in the authors' perceptions of their
audiences. Readers do not have a clear understanding of how O'Connor's
gender influenced the way she assumed people would receive her writing,
especially as an unmarried woman who did not fulfill certain roles
traditionally assigned to Catholic women. Moreover, being white shaped
O'Connor, Gautreaux, and Percy's experiences of Catholicism in the
South. They likely would have had different positions about the role of
the Catholic Church in southern life if they had not benefited from
being white.

Despite these omissions, Nisly's treatment of the lives and fiction of
O'Connor, Gautreux, and Percy underscores the importance of religion and
place in shaping authors' approaches to their audiences. He successfully
proves the centrality of sociohistorical context in shaping these
writers' views of themselves in their various roles as prophet,
companion, and canary.
