[![image](../index_top_logo_.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/).

[![image](../index_top.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/)

![image](../../production/page_2_strip.jpg)

[![image](../New_Vol_13.png)](Front13.html)

Archive Volume XIII (2011) Volume XII (2010) Volume XI (2009) Katrina
(2009) Volume X (2007) Volume IX (2006) Volume VIII (2005) Volume VII
(2004) Volume VI (2003) Volume V (2002) Volume IV (2001) Volume III
(2000) Volume II (1999) Volume I (1998) Main Page

[![image](../page_2_link_4_mast.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/ed.htm)

[![image](../page_2_link_5_ed_policies.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/mission.htm)

[![image](../page_2_link_6_article_sub.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/submit.htm)

[![image](../page_2_link_7_book_rev.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/reviews.htm)

[![image](../page_2_link_8_hill_award.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/award.htm)

[![image](../page_2_link_9_advertisers.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/ads.htm)

[![image](../page_2_link_99_email.jpg)](mailto:aremillard@francis.edu)

![image](../../production/page_2_width_line_side.jpg) \
.

![image](../../production/page_2_width_line_top.jpg)

* * * * *

![image](Reviews/SubjectToDust.jpg)

Richard J. Callahan, Jr. *Work and Faith in the Kentucky Coal Fields:
Subject to Dust*. Religion in North America. Bloomington and
Indianapolis: Indiana University Press, 2009. 259 pp. ISBN
978-0-25335-237-8. Reviewed by Heath W. Carter for *Journal of Southern
Religion*.

* * * * *

Eastern Kentucky coal miners did not check their faith at the mouth of
tenebrous caves, where they piled into cars that carried them miles deep
into the belly of Appalachian peaks. Nor did miners and their families
escape the gritty realities of daily life when they walked through the
doors of rough-hewn holiness churches on the outskirts of town. Just as
black dust and mountain air commingled in early-twentieth-century coal
country, so did religion and work, Richard J. Callahan, Jr., argues in
*Work and Faith in the Kentucky Coal Fields*.

Callahan situates his book within the burgeoning literature on "lived
religion." In the introduction, he rehearses what are now well-worn
criticisms of conventional religious history, with its institutional,
top-down approach, even as he outlines the contours of his distinctive
intervention. For Callahan, "work" and "labor" are "essential categories
for the study of religion" (3). Along with Robert Orsi, Colleen
McDannell, and numerous other contemporary scholars, then, he wants to
challenge artificial distinctions between the sacred and the profane in
order to understand more fully the meaning of faith within the context
of everyday life. Yet Callahan hopes also to illumine something about
the nature of religion itself, to explore the ways in which it is "a
kind of work, always in process as it is produced and reproduced in
particular settings" (8). His interest in religion qua category–what it
is and how it functions–imbues his project with a distinctly religious
studies flavor, which is reinforced by allusions to theorists such as
Emile Durkheim, Jonathan Z. Smith, and Talal Asad.

* * * * *

"Particularly noteworthy for readers of this journal is Callahan's
discussion of what happened when missionaries from the national
Protestant denominations followed the coal operators into the
mountains."

* * * * *

The book unfolds in six thematic chapters, which proceed in loosely
chronological fashion. The first three describe the folkways of Eastern
Kentucky's white, native-born population in the years before
industrialization and then trace the "mind-boggling" changes wrought by
the arrival of the coal companies (67). Particularly noteworthy for
readers of this journal is Callahan's discussion of what happened when
missionaries from the national Protestant denominations followed the
coal operators into the mountains. The miners and their families
rejected these interlopers and their "railroad religion," housed as it
was in stone and brick sanctuaries, monuments to a vision of progress
that was at odds with long-standing local values (60). With
company-sanctioned Methodist and Presbyterian preachers bent on snuffing
out "mountain sacramental worship practices" – foot-washing, healing,
and river baptism, to name a few–native-born Kentuckians redoubled their
commitments to Old Regular Baptist and independent holiness churches
(94).

* * * * *

"What made mining unique was that it was so dangerous."

* * * * *

In the second half of the book, Callahan goes on to explore the
relationship between faith and coal mining work itself. Here he stresses
that many eastern Kentuckians, influenced by the reformed predilections
of mountain religion, understood labor as a divine calling. What made
mining unique was that it was so dangerous. The old cliché about
atheists and fox-holes applies also to drift mines, Callahan suggests:
even those who did not enter as believers sometimes found faith in the
wake of tragic accidents that claimed fellow workers' lives. Miners
routinely brought the working and religious dimensions of their lives
together. The very same bodies that strained under capital's demands
were those that spoke in tongues, fell down in the Spirit, and mediated
all experience of the divine.

From time to time, these intimate connections between labor and faith
surfaced in the political conflicts that rocked coal country. In the
final chapter, Callahan explores the role that folk singers and
miner-preachers played in the well-documented 1931-32 organizing
campaign of the Communist National Miners' Union. Initially, "miners
cast the labor movement as an urgent religious issue," he writes, and
"the NMU took on the aura of a millenarian movement" (180). But then a
contingent of local union leaders returned from a Chicago-based training
with news of the national organization's atheistic and
racially-progressive propensities. One by the name of Harvey Collett
declared, "'they teach that there is no God, that a white woman is equal
to a colored woman, that a negro has a right to marry a white woman,
that Christ is a myth and that there is nothing in the resurrection'"
(187). In short order, the NMU's local support evaporated. In this
world, appeals to "class interest" – conceived in isolation from or
opposition to the prejudices and values that people held dear – had not
a prayer.

Callahan's book is not without its limitations. Many of these stem from
a dearth of sources, which is presumably at the root of his decision to
focus solely on white, native-born miners, for example. One wishes that
there had been a way to include immigrants and African Americans, whom
as he acknowledges together constituted a significant minority of the
region's workforce throughout the period under study. This would not
only have added a valuable comparative dimension to the project, but
would also have shed additional light on his principal actors. When
confronted with the striking language of Collett's diatribe against the
NMU, one cannot help but suspect that race played a more central role in
this story than it appears in Callahan's telling. Nevertheless, this
fine study should inspire more attention to the rich but oft-neglected
intersection of religion and labor in American life.

Heath Carter

Doctoral Candidate in History

University of Notre Dame

**[Search *The Journal of Southern
Religion*](http://jsr.fsu.edu/search.htm)**

.

.

This site was designed by Randall J. Stephens and is maintained by Emily
Clark. © 1998-2011 by \
 *The Journal of Southern Religion*. All rights reserved. ISSN 1094-5253
