[![image](../index_top_logo_.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/).

[![image](../index_top.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/)

![image](../../production/page_2_strip.jpg)

[![image](../New_Vol_13.png)](Front13.html)

Archive Volume XIII (2011) Volume XII (2010) Volume XI (2009) Katrina
(2009) Volume X (2007) Volume IX (2006) Volume VIII (2005) Volume VII
(2004) Volume VI (2003) Volume V (2002) Volume IV (2001) Volume III
(2000) Volume II (1999) Volume I (1998) Main Page

[![image](../page_2_link_4_mast.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/ed.htm)

[![image](../page_2_link_5_ed_policies.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/mission.htm)

[![image](../page_2_link_6_article_sub.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/submit.htm)

[![image](../page_2_link_7_book_rev.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/reviews.htm)

[![image](../page_2_link_8_hill_award.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/award.htm)

[![image](../page_2_link_9_advertisers.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/ads.htm)

[![image](../page_2_link_99_email.jpg)](mailto:aremillard@francis.edu)

![image](../../production/page_2_width_line_side.jpg) \
.

![image](../../production/page_2_width_line_top.jpg)

* * * * *

![image](Reviews/TheMakingOfEvangelicalism.jpg)

Randall Balmer. *The Making of Evangelicalism: From Revivalism to
Politics and Beyond*. Waco: Baylor University Press, 2010. 120 pp. ISBN
978-1-60258-243-9. Reviewed by Darren Dochuk for *Journal of Southern
Religion*.

* * * * *

Academic historians are trained to eschew counterfactuals when writing
and teaching; trading in speculative claims is for the novelist, they're
told, not the professional in pursuit of the cold, hard facts. Yet who
among us hasn't entertained the occasional "what if" question when
trying to add color to a text or motivation to a class of disengaged
undergraduates? In *The Making of Evangelicalism: From Revivalism to
Politics and Beyond*, Randall Balmer teases out a host of "what ifs" in
order to elicit dialogue about the "what now" and "what next" in modern
American evangelicalism. With both a playful edge and moral purpose, he
centers his story around four pivot points—"Four times when, in Robert
Frost's memorable words, ‘two roads diverged in a yellow wood'" (6).
Each juncture, he insists, invites speculation. "What if evangelicals
had gone another way, had taken a different road back there in Robert
Frost's woods? Might history have been different?" (6)

* * * * *

"Aided by the First Amendment's proscription against religious
establishment, which encouraged their free market sensibilities, a
second generation of preachers perfected this strategy during the Second
Great Awakening."

* * * * *

Balmer's first inquiry concerns the foundational period of revivals and
reform in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. It was during the
Great Awakening, he writes, when the potent blend of New England
Puritanism, Continental Pietism, and Scots-Irish Presbyterianism
"created a strain of evangelicalism unique to North America" (11). This
amalgam fused "the obsessive introspection of Puritanism, the doctrinal
precisionism of the Presbyterians, and the warmhearted spiritual ardor
of the Pietists" into a one-of-a-kind American creed (12). Thanks to the
entrepreneurialism of preacher George Whitfield and his peers,
first-generation evangelicals were able to fasten this creed to a
strategy of "populist communications" (13). Aided by the First
Amendment's proscription against religious establishment, which
encouraged their free market sensibilities, a second generation of
preachers perfected this strategy during the Second Great Awakening. The
Whitfield of his generation, Charles Finney shifted evangelicalism's
theological emphases further into the capitalist mode by substituting
his predecessors' Calvinist determinism for Arminian accents on personal
empowerment. Along the way he crafted "new measures" for revivalism that
called for "protracted meetings, the use of advertising, allowing women
to testify at religious gatherings, and the ‘anxious bench' or
‘mourner's bench,' where those deliberating their eternal fates could
come for counseling" (20). Finney's "supple" style "fit the temper of
the times," Balmer notes, and thus became the standard for clerical
success (20). To be sure, this marriage would have downsides for
evangelicalism: susceptibility to "demagoguery" and a "theology of the
lowest common denominator," for instance (15). But like it or not,
Balmer concludes, America's early awakenings allowed evangelicalism to
commandeer large market shares with "intelligence, vigor, and savvy"
(22; 25).

* * * * *

"With characteristic humor, he underscores the existential import of
end-times theology."

* * * * *

If the Second Great Awakening's Arminian emphases facilitated
evangelicalism's ascent in the here and now, its millennial expectations
caused it to focus increasingly on the hereafter. In his second chapter,
Balmer outlines the next juncture, transpiring in the late nineteenth
century, as the movement shifted from a postmillennial outlook, which
held that Christ's return would come after a millennium of righteousness
(thus inspiring confidence in social reform) to a premillennial outlook,
which accepted social crisis as the precursor to Christ's return prior.
His explanation for this turn is erudite, yet also entertaining. With
characteristic humor, he underscores the existential import of end-times
theology. "Although this may appear to be a recondite doctrinal debate,
the unfortunate detritus of people with too much time on their hands,"
he jibes, "this distinction [between postmillennialism and
premillennialism] has had enormous repercussions for the ways that
evangelicals approach society" (29). While postmillennialist teachings
of Finney's day compelled Christians to build God's kingdom on earth,
the premillennialist teachings of Dwight L. Moody's era convinced
Christians that saving souls before Christ's impending return, not
improving society, was all that mattered. This was John Nelson Darby's
view, and it led him to fashion an eschatology that allowed Moody's
peers to announce that they "had cracked the code" of biblical prophecy
and "understood the mind of God" (35). Evangelicals brought this
unbending, despairing schema with them into the twentieth century,
killing in the process any optimism they may have had in the ability of
humans to "make the world a better place" (36-37). In Balmer's eyes,
this was to evangelicals' great detriment, for dispensational
premillennialism quenched their interest in important worldly things,
like environmental preservation, social justice, and fine architecture.

Evangelicalism's preoccupation with dispensationalism set the stage for
a third pivot, the construction of a subculture (45). Just as more
radical, anti-establishment groups emerged within their movement
(notably Pentecostalism), evangelicals began to wall-in their churches
and churchgoers from the secularism outside. They published theological
treatises that defended orthodoxy against modernism, fought evolutionary
science, and constructed a stunning array of "congregations,
denominations, missionary societies, publishing houses, Bible
institutes, Bible colleges, Bible camps, and seminaries—all in an effort
to insulate themselves from the larger world" (49). In the mid-twentieth
century, many within this enclave sought to jettison the fortress
mentality. No one was more important, in this regard, than Billy Graham,
who advocated an accommodating evangelicalism that could use its
powerful operational base to affect (rather than avoid) mainstream
America. By the 1970s, Balmer notes, evangelicalism had entered a new
era of influence. With popular leaders like Graham, Charles Colson, and
Democratic presidential hopeful Jimmy Carter urging them to take
responsibility for their society, evangelicals took their nation by
storm. They built megachurches in their shiny suburbs, flooded the
market with Christian radio and television, and courted politicians who
claimed a born-again faith (58). The problem, Balmer says, is that in
the meantime, evangelicalism lost some of its healthier hesitation with
"worldliness" and "materialism" (58). It may have still been a
subculture, Balmer concludes, replete "with its distinctive jargon,
mores, and celebrities," but by 1980 "it was no longer a counterculture"
(58).

Their brief flirtation with Carter notwithstanding, evangelicals
approached the twenty-first century as a vanguard for the Republican
Right. It is this fourth pivot—the rise of the Religious Right—that
frustrates Balmer most. Bucking the scholarly trend, which tends to
single out *Roe v. Wade*(1973) as this political juggernaut's impetus,
Balmer locates its origin in a lesser-known court ruling: *Green v.
Connally* (1971). This ruling allowed the Internal Revenue Service (IRS)
to deny tax-exempt status to any charitable institution that "engaged in
racial discrimination" (62). Threatened, in their minds, by big
government and the secular humanist agenda it seemed to enforce,
evangelicals followed the lead of Paul Weyrich into the ranks of the
Religious Right. Balmer holds that racism was a motivation for some who
enlisted in this political army, but stresses that it was not the sole
reason for their political awakening. Evangelicals, rather, "saw
themselves as defending…the sanctity of the evangelical subculture from
outside interference" (64). From this point forward, Balmer explains,
the fundamentalism of right-wing politics took hold; anti-abortion,
anti-feminism, anti-homosexuality, and anti-humanism, became the pillars
that glued the new Religious Right together and in line with the GOP,
paving the way for Ronald Reagan and ultimately the two-term presidency
of George W. Bush. With his heaviest-hitting language, Balmer ends his
fourth chapter lambasting the Bush-evangelical accord. By forging this
alliance, he proclaims, evangelicalism broke two precious rules: that
the "church should remain separate from the state," and "religion always
functions best at the margins of society and not in the councils of
power" (74). This wayward drift has delivered evangelicalism "into the
captivity of right-wing politics," he laments, and Biblical essence has,
as a result, given way to partisan expediency (7).

Wanting to infuse his history with moral conviction stirred by current
events, Balmer concludes his book with commentary on evangelicalism's
future trajectory. His core criticism is that by hankering "after
political power" evangelicalism has lost its "prophetic voice" (77).
Since the 1970s, he charges, evangelicals have made their mark in every
sector of society, yet at the cost of being co-opted by powerful
interests. Each of the four junctures outlined in his book has paved the
way for this deleterious effect, but it is the fourth phase that truly
draws his ire for the way it has allowed evangelicalism's expansive
gospel to be manipulated into a narrow, hypocritical political agenda.
"For thirty years," Balmer charges, the Religious Right's singular focus
on culture wars has "blinded evangelicals to other moral issues:
poverty, AIDS, global warming, and the invasion of Iraq" (79). A damning
indictment indeed, but Balmer refuses to end on this bitter note. It is
time for a fifth juncture in evangelicalism's development, he asserts,
and time for a refashioned evangelicalism, one that is sensitive to the
pitfalls of politicking, seductions of influence, and "blandishments of
culture," and more fully committed to speaking for peace, the poor, and
on behalf of justice for all humans and their environment (82-83).

* * * * *

"When talking about evangelicalism's first three pivot points, Balmer,
it's worth noting, leaves room for the movement's constructive
potentials—its appeal to ordinary people and reforming zeal, as well as
its openness to feminism and outsiders living on society's fringe."

* * * * *

Balmer's edgy assertions rouse a range of healthy emotions in the
reader, but at times they also promote a slightly imbalanced view of
evangelicalism. When talking about evangelicalism's first three pivot
points, Balmer, it's worth noting, leaves room for the movement's
constructive potentials—its appeal to ordinary people and reforming
zeal, as well as its openness to feminism and outsiders living on
society's fringe. He needs to in order to prove that evangelicalism
still holds the potential for the progressiveness he admires. But this
approach skews the record a bit. Whereas Balmer stresses the
egalitarianism and activism of nineteenth-century evangelicalism, for
instance, he does so always in sharp contrast to the pessimistic and
politically compromised characteristics of late twentieth-century
evangelicalism. And while he highlights (and applauds) the
counter-cultural sensibilities that seemed to run through early
evangelicalism, he is quick to show how they have dissipated in recent
years. Had he chosen to, though, Balmer could have shaped his narrative
differently to show that evangelicalism has always been vulnerable to
modernity's excesses and unsettling contradictions, even as it has
strived to rise above them, and that it has always courted councils of
power and locked arms with the state at the same time it empowers the
weak and downtrodden. After all, just how counter-cultural was
evangelicalism when riding the wave of commercialization that consumed
America in Finney's day? When endorsing the corporatism and imperialism
of Moody's era and white nationalism of Billy Sunday's? And just how
egalitarian was evangelicalism when encountering Jim Crow in the 1890s,
or industrial unionism in the 1900s, or women's rights in the 1920s?
Most historians would say not very much. On the flip side, Balmer could
have incorporated other plotlines when talking about evangelicalism's
fourth stage—how, for instance, globalization and generational change
have nudged it into realms of identity and influence well beyond the
pale of right-wing politics. The point isn't to undermine Balmer's
compelling thesis but to suggest that by choosing his emphases in this
way, he gives the evangelicalism of yesteryear too much credit and
evangelicalism of today less than it deserves.

Granted, this is all part of Balmer's plan, for his goal isn't
necessarily to add nuance to scholarly understandings of those who have
gone before as much as it is to frame an argument that angers his
contemporaries and causes them to recapture evangelicalism's founding
spirit. And in this sense, his book sparkles. Indeed, *The Making of
Evangelicalism* exhibits the acumen we have come to expect from its
author. In eighty-four pages of sharp, passionate prose, Balmer manages
to illustrate, instruct, redefine, excite, entertain, and most of all
provoke, all the while tweaking the conscience of evangelicals as much
the curiosity of outside observers. His approach results in a remarkable
book, one that can (and should) be read by anyone who wants to learn the
basic history of this movement and measure its profound and enduring
impact on American society.

Darren Dochuk

Associate Professor of History

Purdue University

**[Search *The Journal of Southern
Religion*](http://jsr.fsu.edu/search.htm)**

.

.

This site was designed by Randall J. Stephens and is maintained by Emily
Clark. © 1998-2011 by \
 *The Journal of Southern Religion*. All rights reserved. ISSN 1094-5253
