[![image](../index_top_logo_.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/).

[![image](../index_top.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/)

![image](../../production/page_2_strip.jpg)

[![image](../New_Vol_13.png)](Front13.html)

Archive Volume XIII (2011) Volume XII (2010) Volume XI (2009) Katrina
(2009) Volume X (2007) Volume IX (2006) Volume VIII (2005) Volume VII
(2004) Volume VI (2003) Volume V (2002) Volume IV (2001) Volume III
(2000) Volume II (1999) Volume I (1998) Main Page

[![image](../page_2_link_4_mast.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/ed.htm)

[![image](../page_2_link_5_ed_policies.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/mission.htm)

[![image](../page_2_link_6_article_sub.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/submit.htm)

[![image](../page_2_link_7_book_rev.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/reviews.htm)

[![image](../page_2_link_8_hill_award.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/award.htm)

[![image](../page_2_link_9_advertisers.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/ads.htm)

[![image](../page_2_link_99_email.jpg)](mailto:aremillard@francis.edu)

![image](../../production/page_2_width_line_side.jpg) \
.

![image](../../production/page_2_width_line_top.jpg)

* * * * *

![image](Reviews/God'sAlmostChosenPeople.jpg)

George C. Rable. *God's Almost Chosen Peoples: A Religious History of
the American Civil War*. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina
Press, 2010. 586 pp. ISBN: 9780807834268. Reviewed by Jonathan H. Ebel
for *Journal of Southern Religion*.

* * * * *

Conrad Cherry's three-decade-old documentary collection *God's New
Israel: Religious Interpretations of American Destiny* includes three
"sermons" from the Civil War years. The first two, "National
Responsibility Before God" by New Orleans Presbyterian Benjamin Morgan
Palmer and "The Battle Set in Array" by New York Congregationalist Henry
Ward Beecher demonstrate vividly the shared and deeply contested
scriptural bases for Confederate and Union claims to ultimate
righteousness. Indeed, each preacher turns to the book of Exodus to show
that his side is the new Israel and the other a regurgitated,
Pharaoh-led Egypt. Many of my colleagues in American religious history
use these documents when teaching the Civil War. In addition to being
compact, they capture very nicely the results of the denominational
schisms of the late 1830s and 1840s, how far apart from their former
brethren sectional clergy felt after fifteen years of waxing tension.
The third "sermon" in Cherry's collection is Abraham Lincoln's "Second
Inaugural Address." Read against Palmer and Beecher and in light of the
four years of war that separate their speeches from his, Lincoln is
refreshingly balanced and non-martial, projecting a tone that the nation
would have done well to adopt. These are the building blocks of many
classroom discussions of religion and the American Civil War.

* * * * *

"Rable also presents fascinating evidence for the presence of more than
a few Lincolns, men who recognized the paradoxes of their war, reflected
with humility on the divine will, and were unsure where the war was
heading."

* * * * *

One question students inevitably ask upon reading these sermons is the
extent to which they corresponded to the views of those who wore either
blue or grey. George Rable's *God's Almost Chosen Peoples* allows us to
say with certainty that mixed in among a majority of soldiers who cared
little about religious matters there were Beechers and Palmers who saw
their cause as divinely ordained and looked for evidence of divine favor
or divine wrath in the outcome of battles. Rable also presents
fascinating evidence for the presence of more than a few Lincolns, men
who recognized the paradoxes of their war, reflected with humility on
the divine will, and were unsure where the war was heading. Through
extensive archival research and an impressive command of the
historiography—both classic and new—Rable paints a picture of a nation
and a soldiery that often, though not always, turned to the divine when
wondering about the meaning of the sacrifices they placed "upon the
altar of the nation." The answers they both heard and told themselves,
Rable argues, reflected a patriotic orthodoxy of righteousness on one
side, perfidy on the other, and redemptive suffering through war.

Rable's attention to the voices of the sacrifices is an especially
admirable feature of this very impressive book. Notable too is the
extent of his synthesis of Civil War scholarship from the past fifty
years. By weaving his archival work into narrative strands taken from
the work of Bell Wiley, C.C. Goen, Mitchell Snay, James McPherson,
Charles Regan Wilson, Harry Stout, Drew Gilpin Faust, and Mark Noll,
Rable has written a book that collects the best insights of these
scholars in one place and affirms them with a wide array of popular
voices from the period. This aspect alone ensures that *God's Almost
Chosen Peoples*will be a valuable resource for years to come. At the
same time, because Rable has mixed thematic inquiry and chronological
presentation, his is not an easy book for the Civil War novice. Though
the narrative thread of the book runs from pre-war America to Lincoln's
assassination and (barely) beyond, the evidence supporting the arguments
he makes in individual chapters (e.g, "Carnage," "War's Purpose,"
"Declension,") often comes from across the war or appears without a
date. Rable's arguments are well substantiated and convincing, but he
sometimes makes them at the cost of the reader's orientation within the
war.

* * * * *

"For Rable, civil religion is defined by a belief in American chosenness
and a providential understanding of American / Confederate history."

* * * * *

This book could use refinement on the topic of civil religion, a term
Rable uses throughout but defines in very general terms (3). For Rable,
civil religion is defined by a belief in American chosenness and a
providential understanding of American / Confederate history. These are
two ideas that have shaped American civil religion, to be sure, but were
they its only constituent elements? Are expressions of one belief or the
other always evidence of civil religion? When clerical or lay voices
reflect on God's relationship to the United States, do we understand
their thoughts better as civil religious expressions, or as contributors
to the millennia-long conversation about "the thorny relationship
between national purpose and the divine will?" (p. 203) Civil religion
is a notoriously elastic term. When it is stretched to include all
clerical and many lay pronouncements on God's relationship to the
nation, from the most enthusiastic endorsements to the most stinging
jeremiads, it loses much of its explanatory power.

George Rable has given us the latest in a string of excellent books on
religion and the American Civil War. Admirable for its balance and for
its deft handling of complex sources, *God's Almost Chosen Peoples* is
the kind of in-depth study of the role of religion in American wars that
will appeal to a wide range of scholars of American history. His work
should inspire current and future scholars to explore further the place
of religion in the macro- and micro-narratives of the conflict.

Jonathan Ebel

Assistant Professor of Religion

University of Illinois

**[Search *The Journal of Southern
Religion*](http://jsr.fsu.edu/search.htm)**

.

.

This site was designed by Randall J. Stephens and is maintained by Emily
Clark. © 1998-2011 by \
 *The Journal of Southern Religion*. All rights reserved. ISSN 1094-5253
