---
layout: article
title: "Response to Forum Reviews of God's Own Party"
author: "Daniel K. Williams"
author-note: "Daniel K. Williams is an assistant professor of history at
the University of West Georgia, and the author of <em>God's Own
Party</em> (2010)."
vol: 13
year: 2011
---

I want to express my thanks to the *Journal of Southern Religion* for
arranging a forum of leading scholars in the field of twentieth-century
American evangelical politics to discuss *God's Own Party*. I appreciate
the careful attention that Randall Balmer, Darren Dochuk, J. Russell
Hawkins, and Mark Silk gave to my book, and I am grateful to them for
their thoughtful comments.

Balmer's review highlights the challenge that my study poses to the
conventionally accepted chronology of the Christian Right's origins.
Like Dochuk and a rapidly growing number of other scholars, I believe
that there is a plethora of evidence for evangelicals' pre-1970
commitment to political conservatism. Christian periodicals such as
*Moody Monthly*, *Sword of the Lord*, and *Christianity Today*
championed conservative politics long before the formation of the Moral
Majority, as did many fundamentalist and evangelical leaders. Polling
data indicate that a majority of evangelicals have voted for the
Republican presidential candidate in every presidential election from
1952 to the present, with only two exceptions: 1964 and 1976. When
*Christianity Today* magazine surveyed its readers in 1960, it found
that Republicans outnumbered Democrats by four to one.

Balmer asks what provided the "catalyst" for the modern Religious Right
if it "had been there all along . . . in nascent form." Because I view
the Christian Right as the product of a longstanding evangelical view of
politics as a tool to preserve America's Christian moral order, I think
that it is unprofitable to search for *the* single issue that mobilized
evangelicals in the late 1970s. Rather, the modern Christian Right
developed when many evangelical leaders began to interpret a whole range
of changes in social mores---including the feminist movement, the
increased availability of pornography, the gay rights movement, and
other perceived challenges to the two-parent nuclear family---as products
of "secular humanism," which they thought they could fight in the
political sphere. That view, combined with evangelicals' rising
socioeconomic status and greater awareness of their numerical power,
gave them the impetus they needed to attempt to reclaim their nation
through an unprecedented political mobilization and partisan alliance.

If there is evidence for evangelicals' longstanding interest in
conservative politics, why have Balmer and a number of other scholars
adopted the view that evangelicals abstained from political activity for
the half-century between the Scopes Trial and the Moral Majority? In
part, I think, it is because this is the view that evangelicals
themselves have generally promoted. Balmer is hardly alone in his
experience of a lack of overt politicking in the evangelical churches of
the 1950s and 1960s. Even the evangelicals and fundamentalists who were
the most overtly political during these years---figures such as Billy
Graham, Jerry Falwell, and Carl McIntire---claimed that they eschewed
politics, despite their active effort to mobilize support for Republican
presidential candidates and organize political coalitions of fellow
believers for conservative causes. To them, preaching against "godless"
communism was not politics; it was simply preaching the gospel.
Similarly, warning about the dangers of a Catholic in the White House
was not politics; it was merely exposing the threat of Catholicism. But
as I argue in my book, these actions fostered a latent alliance with the
Republican Party that would become more overt after the late 1970s.
There was a conservative political culture developing in most of the
ostensibly apolitical evangelical churches of the mid-twentieth century.

Scholars have too often assumed that premillennial dispensationalism
discouraged fundamentalists and evangelicals from political activism. In
fact, for many, premillennial dispensationalism gave them the framework
they used to endorse conservative political causes. During the 1930s,
dispensationalist periodicals, including *Moody Monthly*, frequently
borrowed from the apocalyptic language of biblical prophecy to denounce
the New Deal and interpret it as a sign of the end-times. Similarly, in
the late twentieth century, Tim LaHaye, a former Moral Majority board
member and longtime activist in the Christian Right, wrote a
best-selling series of end-times novels that interpreted biblical
prophecy in ways that favored those who were on the "right" side of
America's culture wars. Hal Lindsey's *The Late, Great Planet Earth*
(1970) was the bestselling book of the same decade that produced the
Moral Majority, a phenomenon that suggests that many believers had no
trouble reconciling a belief in Jesus's imminent return with a
commitment to take back the nation through politics.

Balmer is correct in saying that I give only passing attention to the
evangelical left in the early 1970s. I am aware of the excellent work
that is being done on that subject by David Swartz and others, and I
think that it is an important topic. As recent studies in the field have
noted, many evangelicals supported Progressivism, the New Deal, and the
labor movements of the left. American evangelicalism encompassed a
diversity of political perspectives in the past---and still does, as
subscribers to *Sojourners* magazine can attest. Nevertheless, for the
past half-century, left-leaning evangelicals have been a beleaguered
minority. In 1972, only 16 percent of white evangelicals voted for
George McGovern, in spite of his campaign stop at Wheaton College. In
2008, only 24 percent of white evangelicals voted for Barack Obama,
despite his appearances at Rick Warren's Saddleback Church and at
Messiah College in Pennsylvania. *God's Own Party* explains why the
Republican Party can still count on the votes of three out of four white
evangelicals, and why predictions of the Christian Right's demise have
not been realized.

Hawkins raises some excellent questions about my treatment of race, and
I commend to readers some of the studies that he mentions, as well as
Steven Miller's *Billy Graham and the Rise of the Republican South*,
Joseph Crespino's *In Search of Another Country*, and David Chappell's
*A Stone of Hope*, all of which offer thoughtful analyses of white
evangelicals' response to the civil rights movement. No doubt I could
have said more about racial issues in my work (and I did include more
discussion of race in some earlier drafts of the volume), but in the end
I made the coverage choices that I did because I wanted to avoid giving
the impression that the Christian Right originated primarily as a
backlash against the civil rights movement or school integration.

Those who favor the idea that the Christian Right mobilized primarily
because of racial issues have a difficult time explaining why the
movement said so little about race and so much about sex for most of its
post-1970 history. It is difficult to situate the political activities
of Anita Bryant or Beverly LaHaye into a race-based analysis of the
Christian Right, and even more difficult to apply such an analysis to
the political mobilization of Francis Schaeffer. I will concede that
race was more important to Falwell--- and to an even greater degree to Bob
Jones, Jr.---but I address the racial politics of these fundamentalists at
some length in my book.

Hawkins is correct to note that I interpret the division between
evangelicals and fundamentalists during the late 1950s and early 1960s
through the lens of race, and that I also argue that racial issues
played a role in the political reconciliation of these two groups after
1968. I could have said more about the Southern Baptist Convention's
complicated response to civil rights issues in the 1950s and 1960s, but
that subject has been treated at length in other studies, and it seemed
to have limited relevance to Southern Baptists' conservative politics in
the 1970s and 1980s.

I concur with Darren Dochuk's thoughtful suggestions for ways in which
future scholars can expand on my analysis. *God's Own Party* follows the
conventional narrative in emphasizing the role of pastors and movement
leaders in the Christian Right, and I hope that future books on the
subject will move beyond this framework to discuss not only the role of
the financiers of the movement, as Dochuk suggested, but also the role
of local activists who never operated on a national level. More local
studies in the mold of Dochuk's *From Bible Belt to Sunbelt* would be
helpful, as would more cultural studies that explore how Marabel
Morgan's view of Christian femininity, James Dobson's parenting advice,
or David Barton's brand of Christian history have contributed to a
particular strand of evangelical political culture. Eileen Luhr's
*Witnessing Suburbia* offers a model of this approach, but there remains
much to be done in this area. Dochuk is right to note that my section on
evangelical political activity before 1950 is only cursory and could
easily be expanded. I am eagerly anticipating Matthew Sutton's
forthcoming study of evangelical politics during the interwar years.

I also hope to see more discussion of the movement's international
connections in future work. *God's Own Party* barely mentions
evangelicals' interest in Israel, their support for right-wing
governments in Latin America, or their global mission and humanitarian
work. All of these issues need to be explored in greater depth. A future
history of the Christian Right will probably say a lot less about
Falwell and a lot more about the numerous other figures who contributed
to the movement in ways that we are only beginning to realize.
