---
layout: article
title: "Review: God's Own Party"
author: "Randall Balmer"
author-first: Randall
author-last: Balmer
author-note: "Randall Balmer is a professor of religion at Columbia
University."
vol: 13
year: 2011
book-reviewed: "Daniel K. Williams. <em>God's Own Party: The Making of the Christian
Right</em>. New York: Oxford University Press, 2010. 372 pp. ISBN
9780195340846."
---

Several historians seeking to understand the origins of the Religious
Right have taken pains of late to contest the conventional wisdom that
America's evangelicals largely retreated from American society---and
politics---following the Scopes trial in 1925. This interpretation (which
I and others have advanced) asserts that evangelicals burrowed into a
subculture of their own making before emerging once again in the
mid-1970s as a cultural and political force. In *From Bible Belt to Sun
Belt: Plain-folk Religion, Grassroots Politics, and the Rise of
Evangelical Conservatism*, for instance, Darren Dochuk argues that
southern California functioned as a kind of Petri dish for right-wing
politics, especially among those who had migrated West from what he
calls the "western South" in the 1940s and 1950s.

In *God's Own Party: The Making of the Christian Right*, Daniel K.
Williams, from the University of West Georgia, similarly argues that
evangelicals were hardly quiescent during the middle decades of the
twentieth century. "Conservative Christians had been politically active
since the early twentieth century, and they never retreated from the
public square," Williams contends. "Evangelicals gained prominence
during Ronald Reagan's campaign not because they were speaking out on
political issues---they had been doing that for decades---but because they
were taking over the Republican Party" (2).

The author's evidence for this claim is the formation of the National
Association of Evangelicals in 1942 as well as the growing compatibility
between evangelicals and the Republican Party in the 1950s and 1960s,
especially their shared commitment to anticommunism. By the late 1960s,
Williams says, evangelicals found further compatibility with the
Republicans on social issues: opposition to abortion, feminism,
pornography, and gay rights. Indeed, Billy Graham's friendship with
Richard Nixon, beginning in 1950, symbolized unity against communism,
and the conservative takeover of the Southern Baptist Convention in 1979
provided heft to the Religious Right. Williams makes the compelling
point that evangelical leaders in the South had used opposition to the
1954 *Brown v. Board of Education* decision as a rallying cry, but the
"end of the civil rights movement facilitated the formation of a new
Christian political coalition, because it enabled fundamentalists and
evangelicals who had disagreed over racial integration to come together"
(6).

There is much to commend this argument, not least the author's
prodigious research. But I wonder if he overestimates the influence of
the National Association of Evangelicals, especially on politics.
Williams asserts several times that the election of John F. Kennedy in
1960 caused evangelicals "to lose their influence in Washington, and an
alliance with conservative Republicans seemed to offer a way to
recapture it" (62). But we learn precious little about what
evangelicals' supposed influence had won during the previous decade.
True, Graham strutted about the White House and offered diplomatic and
political advice to Nixon and Dwight Eisenhower, but did evangelicals
exercise any real political mojo? Williams cites the insertion of "under
God" into the Pledge of Allegiance and the motto "In God We Trust" on
the nation's currency and coinage in 1954. Well, okay, but does that
really bespeak evangelical influence, or can it more nearly be
attributed to civil religion and cold war passions? The impetus for
"under God" in the Pledge, after all, came not from the National
Association of Evangelicals but from the Knights of Columbus, an
organization not noted for its evangelical sympathies.

Williams also, in my judgment, reads far too much into the antics of
outliers like Carl McIntire, John R. Rice, Bob Jones Jr., and "Fighting
Bob" Shuler. These are colorful characters, to be sure, but to infer
that they represented much more than themselves and small bands of
followers gives them far too much credit.

*God's Own Party* suffers from questionable characterizations and
assertions. Williams identifies John Kennedy, a cold warrior reluctant
to cast his lot with the civil rights movement, as a "liberal," for
instance, a label that historians would dispute. Too often the author
conflates evangelicals with fundamentalists, and he places the
evangelical embrace of premillennialism in the 1930s, about half a
century too late. Williams also identifies Joseph Lieberman as an
Orthodox Jew ("observant," not Orthodox) and Harold Hughes, Democratic
senator from Iowa, as a Republican. (Having lived in Iowa during
Hughes's remarkable and distinguished political career, I can attest in
no uncertain terms that he was *not* a Republican; if he were still
alive, Hughes might very well sue for libel!) Taken singly, none of
these errors is egregious; the cumulative effect, however, gives the
reader occasion to question the author's judgment.

In some cases, the juxtapositions are odd, even contradictory. In the
course of pointing out (correctly) that evangelicals were ambivalent at
best about abortion, Williams recounts a gathering of evangelicals in
August 1968 and a follow-up article in *Christianity Today* that offered
no consensus on opposition to abortion. In the opening sentence of the
following paragraph, however, Williams asserts that "northern
evangelicals *strengthened* their opposition to the procedure" (114,
italics added). A couple of pages later, Williams quotes W. A.
Criswell's endorsement of the *Roe v. Wade* decision. Later in the
narrative, Williams recounts what was arguably the turning point in the
1980 campaign, the National Affairs Briefing, the evangelical political
rally in Dallas where Ronald Reagan famously declared, "I know that you
can't endorse me, but I want you to know that I endorse you and what you
are doing." The author immediately goes on to say that "no one had
equaled Reagan in speaking out about abortion," but he fails to note
that in Reagan's speech to fifteen thousand evangelicals, a peroration
laced with lamentations about America's moral decay, Reagan did not
include abortion in his laundry list of iniquities (187).

What I find most curious about Williams's thesis is that his own
evidence very often contradicts it. The author points out, for example,
that evangelicals by and large---Graham excepted---did not protest the
school-prayer rulings of the early 1960s. In fact, such venerable
evangelical publications as *Eternity*, *Moody Monthly*, and
*Christianity Today* applauded the decisions, and "most evangelical
leaders decided that the Court had acted wisely in putting an end to a
tradition that violated the Constitution's establishment clause" (67).
So what provided the catalyst for the Religious Right? I surmise that,
having already ruled out school prayer and the *Roe* decision, Williams
is left with the somewhat nebulous argument that it had been there all
along, since the 1930s and 1940s, albeit in nascent form, only to spring
to life in the late 1970s in opposition to gay rights and Jimmy Carter.

This "sleeper cell" thesis, however, lacks nuance, and it fails to
explain fully---or even in part, for that matter---the conundrum of
evangelicals' opposition to Carter, one of their own. Williams's
selective use of evidence, moreover, leaves the impression of
inevitability, that---*of course!*---evangelicals would align themselves
with the hard right.

Not so fast. What does Williams do with left-leaning evangelicals and,
more specifically, with the Chicago Declaration of Evangelical Social
Concern, crafted and signed by fifty-five prominent evangelicals in
November 1973? This statement contained blistering condemnations of
racism, militarism, capitalism, and sexism---all from an evangelical
theological perspective. While no one would argue that these sentiments
represented a majority of evangelicals, the mere existence of such a
statement suggests something short of a consensus on conservative
politics. Although Williams mentions Jim Wallis several times, he
neglects the Chicago Declaration altogether.

Paradoxically, when Williams treads close to the true source of the
Religious Right---the 1971 *Green v. Connolly* decision that led to the
rescission of tax-exempt status at "segregation academies" and places
like Bob Jones University---he stumbles. The author dates evangelical
resistance to the Internal Revenue Service to 1978, whereas Bob Jones
University, after years of warnings, lost its tax exemption on January
19, 1976---which Paul Weyrich and the *apparatchiks* of the Religious
Right tried to pin on Carter, even though Carter was only beginning his
quest for the Democratic nomination in January 1976. (Carter, in fact,
won the Iowa precinct caucuses the same day that Bob Jones University
lost its tax exemption.)

Williams is on steadier ground in recounting the fortunes of the
Religious Right in the years since 1980, from Ralph Reed's "body bag"
tactics and Pat Robertson's quixotic bid for the Republican presidential
nomination in 1988 to George W. Bush's declaration that Jesus was his
favorite political philosopher. But that is more familiar terrain, and
it does little to shore up the author's sagging thesis about evangelical
political influence in the middle decades of the twentieth century.

By now I suspect it's clear that I'm less than persuaded by Williams's
argument, although I readily acknowledge that my resistance is based not
only on my own research but on reminiscences from the 1950s and 1960s.
In the evangelical world I inhabited in the middle decades of the
twentieth century, the National Association of Evangelicals was
toothless and little more than symbolic. Politics was considered
"worldly" and not all that important because of our premillennial
convictions: If Jesus will return at any moment, why bother with social
amelioration? To make his case, Williams would have to demonstrate that
characters like McIntire, Shuler, and Rice amounted to anything more
than the cranks---part risible, part embarrassing---that we knew them to be.

Yes, evangelicals did retreat from the public square following the
Scopes trial of 1925 or thereabouts; neither Williams nor Dochuk has
persuaded me otherwise. Evangelicals spent the middle decades of the
twentieth century constructing their own institutions---congregations,
denominations, Bible camps, Bible institutes, Christian colleges,
seminaries, missionary societies, publishing houses---institutions that
finally, by the mid-1970s, were mature enough to provide a foundation
for an evangelical return to public life. The interesting, and still
largely untold, part of the story is why they chose that moment, how
they discarded premillennialism to do so, and why they turned so
rapidly---and rabidly---against Jimmy Carter, their fellow evangelical.

And once that story is told, an even larger one awaits: How a movement
notable in the antebellum period for its concern for those on the
margins of society, those Jesus called "the least of these," mutated
into an engine for the hard right.
