---
layout: article
title: "Review: God's Own Party"
author: "Mark Silk"
author-note: "Mark Silk is Professor of Religion and Public Life at
Trinity University."
vol: 13
year: 2011
book-reviewed: "Daniel K. Williams. <em>God's Own Party: The Making of the Christian
Right</em>. New York: Oxford University Press, 2010. 372 pp. ISBN
9780195340846."
---

It was in 1980 that the Christian Right---or Religious Right, if you
prefer---became a readily identifiable national force associated with the
Republican Party. If you're looking for a smart, up-to-date, and
readable account of how this came about and how the association has
fared since, then this is the book for you. While much of the ground is
familiar, Williams provides important new background, context, and
insight, based on archival research as well as published sources. It is
a fitting successor to William Martin's 1996 narrative, *With God on Our
Side*.

The book begins with prehistory stretching back to the 1920s, when
fundamentalists conceived a "vision of reclaiming America's Christian
identity through politics" (3). Williams traces a line of conservative
Protestant leaders who even during the Depression---when southern
evangelicals voted overwhelmingly for national Democrats---found a
congenial home in the Republican Party. In the 1940s, the GOP's embrace
of partisan anticommunism began drawing evangelicals to their side in
greater numbers. Beginning in the late 1960s, the emergence of culture
wars issues---feminism, abortion, pornography, and gay rights---enabled
evangelicals to shift the GOP agenda in their direction, setting the
stage for the religiously inflected party that it has now become.

As useful as the book's pre-1960s background is, it does not
fundamentally revise our understanding of how the Christian Right came
about. In that regard, a richer and less familiar tale is told by Darren
Dochuk in his new book on evangelical politics in southern California,
*From Bible Belt to Sun Belt*(2011). But however the blanks are filled
in, there really was a changing of the terms, and a changing of the
guard, in the 1970s. Here, Williams provides the best account available
of how the various strands of conservative religious thought and
engagement were woven into a national movement. His portrait of Francis
Schaeffer, the independent-minded Presbyterian missionary in Switzerland
who single-handedly turned evangelicals against abortion, is worth the
price of admission itself. Indeed, the importance of Schaeffer's 1976
book *How Should We Then Live?* in creating a generation of evangelical
activists can hardly be overemphasized.

The fulcrum of *God's Own Party*is the Carter presidency. Jimmy Carter,
the born-again Southern Baptist from Georgia, represented a serious
challenge to the southern strategy that was conceived under Richard
Nixon as the ticket to a permanent Republican majority. Southern
evangelicals voted heavily for Carter as doubly one of their own, but it
did not take long for evangelical leaders to become disillusioned with
him. Their success in turning their flocks against him---and away from the
Democratic Party---transformed American politics by welding a disparate
array of state, local, and national protest efforts into the base of the
GOP.

If Williams' survey has a particular lesson for the current political
moment, it is that the "values voters" or "social conservatives" of the
Christian Right have from the beginning had low-tax, small-government,
free-market DNA in their genetic make-up. The Tea Party may look like
something new under the sun, but it draws on attitudes about government
and economic policy that hark back to the 1920s, when fundamentalists
turned their backs on the populism of William Jennings Bryan and
embraced the gospel of anticommunism. It should come as no surprise that
so many Tea Partiers are white evangelicals, or that so many of the
political figures they support come out of the Christian Right. As
conceived by Max Weber, the spirit of capitalism was a moral imperative,
and as such, it is alive and well among conservative American
Protestants. No wonder they prefer to blame big government rather than
the invisible hand of the global economy for the ills that beset them.

The Christian Right has become the longest lasting political movement,
religious or otherwise, in American history. The challenge for
historians is how to integrate it into the larger story of American
conservatism since the Gilded Age. Among its other virtues, *God's Own
Party* will help them meet that challenge.
