[![image](../index_top_logo_.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/).

[![image](../index_top.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/)

![image](../../production/page_2_strip.jpg)

[![image](../New_Vol_13.png)](Front13.html)

Archive Volume XIII (2011) Volume XII (2010) Volume XI (2009) Katrina
(2009) Volume X (2007) Volume IX (2006) Volume VIII (2005) Volume VII
(2004) Volume VI (2003) Volume V (2002) Volume IV (2001) Volume III
(2000) Volume II (1999) Volume I (1998) Main Page

[![image](../page_2_link_4_mast.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/ed.htm)

[![image](../page_2_link_5_ed_policies.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/mission.htm)

[![image](../page_2_link_6_article_sub.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/submit.htm)

[![image](../page_2_link_7_book_rev.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/reviews.htm)

[![image](../page_2_link_8_hill_award.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/award.htm)

[![image](../page_2_link_9_advertisers.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/ads.htm)

[![image](../page_2_link_99_email.jpg)](mailto:aremillard@francis.edu)

![image](../../production/page_2_width_line_side.jpg) \
.

![image](../../production/page_2_width_line_top.jpg)

* * * * *

![image](Reviews/BillyGraham.jpg)

Steven P. Miller. *Billy Graham and the Rise of the Republican South*.
Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2009. 304 pp. ISBN
9780812241518. Reviewed by Merrill Hawkins, Jr. for *Journal of Southern
Religion*.

* * * * *

Steven P. Miller's 2009 study of Billy Graham shows the strong
involvement of the noted evangelist in American politics, an involvement
that has been forgotten by much of the collective American memory. A
cultivator of relationships with presidents and other political figures,
Graham's political involvement reached its peak with the Nixon
Administration. The embarrassment of Watergate forced the minister to
adopt a stated position of neutrality, although he continued to serve as
a counsel of sorts to the presidents who followed (with the exception of
Carter). Miller's topic, however, is more precise than exploring the
role of Graham on the national scene as pastor to the White House. The
skilled historian contends that Graham's involvement as a southerner in
GOP politics paralleled the region's shift from the Solid Democratic
South to a firm Republican bastion. Moreover, Graham's political
involvement, the book argues, actually facilitated that shift.

* * * * *

"Miller aptly weaves the narratives of the two issues together, although
he did not clearly demonstrate how Graham's response to King contributed
to the growth of the southern GOP."

* * * * *

The book covers more than Graham's contribution to the dismantling of
the Democratic Party's southern base. It also covers Graham's public
response to the civil rights movement and Martin Luther King, Jr.
Graham's political activity on behalf of the GOP and his relationship
with King are actually two separate stories. Miller aptly weaves the
narratives of the two issues together, although he does not clearly
demonstrate how Graham's response to King contributed to the growth of
the southern GOP. Nonetheless, the account of the relationship between
the two men and their differing perspectives on the methods needed to
dismantle segregation rests on firm scholarship grounded in primary
sources informed by secondary research.

Miller explains that an "evangelical universalism" informed Graham's
social and political involvement. This theological worldview, developed
by mass evangelists like Dwight Moody, stressed the importance of
personal, individual salvation and did not have a clear concept of
corporate evil. Evil at the national or collective level was simply the
sum of the evil intentions and deeds of large numbers of individuals.
Accordingly, social reform without personal salvation always fails.
Guided by this theology and its emphasis on personal morality, Graham
saw his mass religious meetings as a key to desegregating the South and
achieving racial harmony. This theology, which Miller explains with
neutrality, helps the present day reader to grasp why Graham could
condemn Klan violence while also calling for civil rights leaders to
obey the law and to desist from marches that violate the law.

* * * * *

"In making his case, Miller provides numerous examples of national GOP
figures enlisting Graham to secure southern support."

* * * * *

While Graham's courting of national politicians has been largely
recognized by historians, Miller shows how the national GOP used Graham
to help win elections and build a southern party base. In making his
case, Miller provides numerous examples of national GOP figures
enlisting Graham to secure southern support. For example, the Nixon
White House, fearful of a George Wallace third party candidacy in 1972,
drafted Graham to reach out to the Alabama governor and encourage him to
run in the Democratic primaries.

Miller's study of the political involvement of Billy Graham as a
southerner and its effect on southern politics merits a close read by
all interested in Graham and American Evangelicalism, as well as the
interface of southern politics and religion.

[[Click here to read Miller's reflection essay, "Graham at the
Confluence"](../Volume12/Miller%20Author%20Reflection.html)]

Merrill Hawkins, Jr.

Associate Professor of Religion

Carson-Newman College

**[Search *The Journal of Southern
Religion*](http://jsr.fsu.edu/search.htm)**

.

.

This site was designed by Randall J. Stephens and is maintained by Emily
Clark. Â© 1998-2011 by \
 *The Journal of Southern Religion*. All rights reserved. ISSN 1094-5253
