---
layout: article
title: "Response to Roundtable on Class"
author: "John Hayes"
author-note: "John Hayes is an assistant professor of history at Augusta
State University."
vol: 13
year: 2011
---

I have enjoyed the opportunity to participate in this roundtable. It is
interesting to me that each of us, working in scholarly isolation---two of
us in labor history, two in religious history, and one in religious
studies---have come to emphasize class as a salient part of religious life
in a region and era usually named for its racial configurations: the Jim
Crow South. I would like to offer a few ruminating observations and
hunches towards further questions, in what I hope will be a continuing
conversation, as we---the readers of this journal more broadly---try to tell
the story of religion in the South in ways that adequately express the
complexity, nuance, and paradox of our subject-matter.

### 1

All of us insist in different ways that class analysis reveals religious
differences that either had not been seen---or that had been noted but
never accentuated as a dominant theme in the scholarship. Simply put, we
all say that the religious life of southern industrial and agricultural
*workers* (more on categories in a moment) was different from the
religious life of the *propertied*or*middle class* southerners we know
well through the regional denominations and local congregations whose
life they dominated. We all also argue that we need to try to see the
religious life of southern workers through their own lenses, and not
through the overwhelmingly negative portraits that the propertied
painted---and that some historians have too easily repainted. *But*: how
exactly to categorize such difference remains an open question. What
religion or what religious life are we talking about? What is a good
shorthand term that at least suggests these differences, and opens the
door to their elaboration? Does adding "working class" or "middle class"
to denominational categories like "Baptist" or "Pentecostal" adequately
express this difference? Or are we instead talking about innumerable
local contexts with all sorts of variation and variety, which make
regional generalization impossible? Or, if "evangelical" is the largest
umbrella term for much of regional religious life in the years
1900--1950, should we seek, in class and race terms, to clarify and
differentiate distinct branches of a broadly evangelical tree? My
research has led me to emphasize commonalities across the region in the
religious life of working southerners, whether in industry or
agriculture, in mountains or in Delta. I've called this religious strand
"folk religion" but, depending upon the day, that term seems alternately
either apropos or badly inadequate. At any rate, I hope the search for
viable categories becomes a pressing theme for students of southern
religion. For a long time we have had denominational and racial
categories to frame difference, but if we push class analysis and insist
that we are talking about real difference, how do we then rightly
categorize what, thirty years ago, scholars were calling "varieties of
southern religious experience"?

### 2

It is striking and somewhat ironic to me that class analysis is so much
better developed for the "pre-capitalist" (or perhaps
"proto-capitalist") Old South than it is for the overtly capitalist,
industrializing, market-suffused New South. Most any student of the
South is familiar with antebellum planters, slaves, yeomen, and "poor
whites," but how exactly to name New South groups in class terms is not
a simple matter---even for those of us who seek to do that in our own
work. "Working class" and "middle class" suggest an industrial context,
but of course the New South was still predominantly agricultural, and
neither term was common in the discourse of the society itself. Richard
Callahan helpfully reminds us of E.P. Thompson's admonition that "class
is a relationship, not a thing," and I think from there we can begin to
derive terms more organic to the southern context. As Callahan argues,
"religion" and "class" are not discrete entities in relation to one
another, but rather intertwined phenomena inherent in human
relationships. Certain religious practices become intrinsic to a
distinct class identity, and vice versa. Framing the question
differently, then, how can the study of religion in the New South help
us to find viable class categories for the society? The New South was
acutely class-conscious, so how can awareness of the ways in which
differences of religion became signifiers of differences of class help
us to name these different classes? I have suggested "the propertied"
and "the poor" as region-wide categories, but this may be entirely too
simple.

### 3

Class analysis reminds us that wealth in the New South was inherently
tied to fairly personalized forms of exploitation, in both agriculture
and industry. Exceedingly low wages in industry and radically unequal
credit arrangements in agriculture, along with militant anti-unionism,
became staples of the New South economy. We know plenty about these
economic practices from the scholarship, but we know very little about
how religion was bound up with this exploitation. Here again, the
literature on the antebellum South is so much better developed.
Undergraduates in survey classes can tell you how antebellum southern
white evangelicals came to justify and defend slavery---in elaborate
theological terms. But how did a Delta landlord/Baptist deacon
religiously justify raw exploitation of his tenants, in an era when
evangelical cultural power was at its zenith? How did a Methodist mill
owner make religious sense of his low wages and union crushing as he
lived in a society H. L. Mencken famously dubbed "the Bible Belt"? These
questions have been asked before, but I think we still lack a compelling
answer that shapes our narratives of southern history.

### 4

A volley of books in the past fifteen years has explored racial
configurations in the Jim Crow South. We now have a nuanced,
ever-refining race analysis that moves well past the older frames of
Winthrop Jordan and Gunnar Myrdal. How can this roundtable's
emphasis---class---engage with the literature on race? Does it shake up any
categories, or show us significant things we have not seen? Or, does
class analysis only take place under the larger umbrella of Jim Crow?
Are we clarifying class *within* a dominant culture defined by race, or
are we finding in class analysis things that challenge the (assumed)
predominance of race in all areas of New South life? If the former, then
I cannot help but feel that we are filling in some lines on a script
whose plot we already know. If the latter, then class-focused
explorations in southern religion promise to shake up what we think we
know, and yield us a rather different story of a South we do not know as
well as we thought we did.
