[![image](../index_top_logo_.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/).

[![image](../index_top.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/)

![image](../../production/page_2_strip.jpg)

[![image](../New_Vol_13.png)](Front13.html)

Archive Volume XIII (2011) Volume XII (2010) Volume XI (2009) Katrina
(2009) Volume X (2007) Volume IX (2006) Volume VIII (2005) Volume VII
(2004) Volume VI (2003) Volume V (2002) Volume IV (2001) Volume III
(2000) Volume II (1999) Volume I (1998) Main Page

[![image](../page_2_link_4_mast.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/ed.htm)

[![image](../page_2_link_5_ed_policies.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/mission.htm)

[![image](../page_2_link_6_article_sub.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/submit.htm)

[![image](../page_2_link_7_book_rev.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/reviews.htm)

[![image](../page_2_link_8_hill_award.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/award.htm)

[![image](../page_2_link_9_advertisers.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/ads.htm)

[![image](../page_2_link_99_email.jpg)](mailto:aremillard@francis.edu)

![image](../../production/page_2_width_line_side.jpg) \
.

![image](../../production/page_2_width_line_top.jpg)

* * * * *

![image](Reviews/MormonMenace.JPG)

Patrick Q. Mason. *The Mormon Menace: Violence and Anti-Mormonism in the
Postbellum South*. New York: Oxford University Press, 2011. 264 pp. ISBN
9780199740024. Reviewed by Jennifer Lindell for the *Journal of Southern
Religion*.

* * * * *

In *The Mormon Menace: Violence and Anti-Mormonism in the Postbellum
South*, Patrick Q. Mason discovers the limits of religious tolerance as
he explores reactions to the Mormon presence in the post-Civil War
South. Mason explains that Mormons inspired opposition and violence with
an intensity and frequency that other religious minorities did not
experience. Southerners would settle for nothing less than the total
eradication of "the Mormon menace." Mason argues that the long tradition
of vigilantism in the South extended to Mormons because the institution
of polygamy challenged white male honor. Envisioning Mormon missionaries
as potential seducers of southern women, white men fell back on a long
tradition of extralegal coercion to support the common good and
violently asserted their masculinity and prowess to protect "the
chastity of their women and the sanctity of their homes" (66).
Exacerbating the violence, Mason contends, was anti-Mormon rhetoric that
attacked Mormon doctrine, legitimacy, and practices. This rhetoric was
strongest from evangelical Protestants who became more vitriolic where
itinerant Mormon missionaries were most successful. At a national level,
southern evangelicals played a role in the campaign against Mormon
polygamy and theocracy. Here, Mason is careful to note the irony.
Southerners abandoned their earlier battle cries of popular sovereignty,
states’ rights, and limited federal government in the crusade against
Mormonism. In the postbellum years, Mason argues, the anti-polygamy
campaign "subsume[d] regional and partisan identities," united southern
democrats and northern republicans, and contributed to the reforging of
the nation (95). North and South could both agree that the polygamous
theocracy in the West must be stopped.

* * * * *

"Mason identifies the 1880s as the time when the federal government got
serious about the "Mormon question," passing two major pieces of
legislation that struck at Mormon politics and polygamy."

* * * * *

As the national anti-Mormon campaign intensified, so did violence
against Mormons in the South. Mason identifies the 1880s as the time
when the federal government got serious about the "Mormon question,"
passing two major pieces of legislation that struck at Mormon politics
and polygamy. Correspondingly, the 1880s were the high point of
anti-Mormon violence with 15 to 45 cases reported each year (131).
Missionaries were targeted, but so were converts or even those who were
merely friendly to Mormons. Mason postulates that attacks on neophytes
were in response to the social disruption and severing of kinship ties
that conversion to Mormonism was assumed to cause. He outlines the
various types of abuse the missionaries faced, including abduction,
expulsion, whipping, property damage, death threats, arson, and outright
murder, to reinforce his assertion that vigilante violence was a means
of social control. Rather than having the desired effect of driving the
Mormons from the South, however, the myriad types of persecution only
strengthened Mormon resolve. The victims became martyrs, and their
suffering was added to the larger persecution narrative that was
instrumental in shaping Latter-day Saint self-identity and in defining
boundaries between Mormons and non-Mormons. The Mormon Church
deliberately deployed tales of southern persecutions to sustain their
oppositional identity.

Mason opens with two case studies of southern anti-Mormon violence that
introduce his two primary themes of polygamy and religious competition:
the murder of Joseph Standing and the Cane Creek massacre. He hones in
on polygamy in the next two chapters, discussing Southern perceptions
of, and concrete responses to, Mormon missionaries, while arguing that
polygamy was the driving force behind southern anti-Mormonism. Chapter 7
describes the physical reactions that resulted from pervasive
anti-Mormon rhetoric and outlines patterns of anti-Mormon violence. The
last two chapters discuss the effects of southern violence on the
creation and maintenance of Mormon identity, as well as the limits of
religious pluralism in the postbellum United States. Using Jews and
Catholics in the South as examples, he shows that religious pluralism
was possible only if non-Protestants kept their worship private and fit
into mainstream society in all other ways. Mormon insistence on
maintaining themselves as a separate and chosen people transgressed
southern expectations and aggravated tensions. As Mormons mainstreamed
into American society, anti-Mormon violence and sentiment decreased.

In his examination of the role of violence in (re)creating identity,
Mason joins fellow American religious historian Edward J. Blum (*W.E.B.
DuBois, American Prophet* [2007]). While Blum's focus is on
African-American lynchings and the narratives they inspired, both he and
Mason reach the same conclusion: minority groups, whether racial or
religious, could and did transform the meaning of violence by actively
reconstructing their identities to include, and even glorify, brutality.
Mason's work also dovetails with Jason C. Bivins' *Religion of Fear: The
Politics of Horror in Conservative Evangelicalism* (2008) in that both
demonstrate the effectiveness of the deliberate deployment of fear to
advance evangelical goals. Finally, Mason finds commonality with Anthony
Pinn's study of black religious responses to terror (*Terror and
Triumph: The Nature of Black Religion* [2003]) in that both probe the
role of suffering in creating or strengthening religious commitment.

By moving the focus from the frontier to the South, Mason is able to add
to the traditional understanding of the self-conscious creation of
Mormon religious identity through antagonism. He also brings a new
perspective to southern vigilantism by focusing on white-on-white
violence instigated by religious difference. Another strength of this
work is Mason's ability to move smoothly between non-Mormon and Mormon
viewpoints, drawing out not only southern thoughts and concomitant
actions but also the Mormon response. Mason illuminates relatively
unknown episodes in southern history and finds relevant meaning for
Mormons, the South, and the nation as a whole.

Jennifer Lindell

M.A. Student in History

San Diego State University

**[Search *The Journal of Southern
Religion*](http://jsr.fsu.edu/search.htm)**

.

.

This site was designed by Randall J. Stephens and is maintained by Emily
Clark. © 1998-2011 by \
 *The Journal of Southern Religion*. All rights reserved. ISSN 1094-5253
