---
layout: article
title: "Review: Jimmy Carter, the Politics of Family, and the Rise of
the Religious Right"
author: "Steven P. Miller"
author-note: "Steven P. Miller is an adjunct associate professor of
history at Webster University."
vol: 13
year: 2011
book-reviewed: "J. Brooks Flippen. <em>Jimmy Carter, The Politics of Family, and the Rise
of the Religious Right</em>. Athens: University of Georgia Press, 2011. 450
pp. 9780820337692 (cloth); 9780820337708 (paper)."
---

If the Seventies are hot (historiographically speaking), then Jimmy
Carter has yet to receive his full moment in the sun. In popular memory,
the Carter presidency retains many of the surreal qualities that
historians have dispelled about the rest of the decade. His outsider
status, powerful as a campaign symbol, made him hapless as a
presidential actor; refreshing piety became aloof self-righteousness.
Viewed from the other end of Reagan Revolution, the man from Plains
seems never to have had a chance. Thus, it is tempting to see Carter as
an idiosyncratic transitional figure whose apparent revival of the New
Deal Coalition turned out to be its denouement. Historian J. Brooks
Flippen does not exactly counter this conventional interpretation so
much as he lays bare its internal drama.

Flippen offers a dual history of the rise of the "modern Religious
Right" and the fall of President Carter, with particular emphasis on a
political issue both sought to claim: the presumably imperiled American
family. Carter and the Religious Right, Flippen argues, "share a common
past" (349). Carter "baptized" his nemesis, which then pointedly denied
him a second blessing in 1980 (23). The strength of Flippen's book---and
what makes it an important contribution to the spate of recent works on
the seventies---is that it casts Carter as an active agent in the late
1970s conservative turn, even if he was not always an eager participant
in developments he often could not control.

Flippen unfolds his tale in rich detail: Carter's faith moved front and
center during his White House run, prompted by journalists eager to
anoint a spokesperson for the born-agains. Carter probably did not win a
majority of evangelical votes in 1976. However, he did attract support
from Pat Robertson and Richard John Neuhaus (neither of whom were then
outright rightists), as well as other future critics. Expectations were
high among social conservatives. Liberals had expectations, too. And
both groups more or less heard what they wanted to hear from candidate
Carter. Thus, while Carter understandably thought giving attention to
family issues would assist him politically, he proved mistaken. Carter
spoke about the crisis of the family with the clean, warm-but-spare
language befitting of a Sunday school lesson. Alas, the tone of family
politics would not always prove so family-friendly.

Almost from the start of the Carter administration, controversy bubbled
around the big three issues of seventies family politics---the Equal
Rights Amendment (ERA), abortion, and gay rights. Carter's support for
the ERA was straightforward (even if ERA backers did not always believe
so), but he wobbled on the other two issues. Carter candidly conceded
his moral discomfort with homosexuality, although he recognized the
growing prominence of gay rights supporters within the Democratic party
(Flippen does a nice job of covering Carter's concerted but awkward
interactions with gay activists). Carter supported restricting federal
funding of abortions, even while he "wished the issue would recede"
(223).

Carter sought consensus through civility---or, rather, the civil
appreciation, a la Niebuhr, of life's complexity. However, two notable
efforts to find consensus---the 1977 National Women's Conference and the
long-awaited 1980 White House Conference on Families---ultimately
broadcast polarization. Meanwhile, the long-announced Internal Revenue
Service move to revoke the tax-exempt status of neo-segregationist
Christian schools further aggravated relations with evangelical
conservatives.

The general framework of this narrative will be familiar to many
readers. Still, Flippen is able to present the story from multiple
perspectives. His writing is informed by extensive research in the Jimmy
Carter Library, deft negotiation of secondary accounts, and eight
interviews, mostly with conservative activists. Flippen's account
complements Laura Kalman's deep political history of the late 1970s
(*Right Star Rising* \[Norton, 2010\]) and Daniel K. Williams'
comprehensive history of the broader Christian Right (*God's Own Party*
\[Oxford, 2010\]). In marshaling so many anecdotes, Flippen offers
fascinating glimpses at important but sometimes underappreciated
Religious Right figures, such as Charismatic pastor John Gimenez and
pro-family organizer Connie Marshner. Flippen's prose is competent,
confident, and generally clear, save for several typos and small errors
that a copy editor should have flagged (most problematically, the
curious distinction in the index between Arizona Congressman and
Religious Right booster John Conlan and a nonexistent "James" Conlan).

A more pared down narrative (with fewer quotations from secondary
sources) might have given Flippen's historiographical moves more
breathing room. He wisely adopts a broad understanding of the Religious
Right and, with it, a multi-causal explanation of its origins.
Abortion---sometimes cast as the sleeping giant of seventies social
issues---was a prominent campaign issue in 1976 (although not to the
extent that many analysts predicted it would be). Despite Carter's
search for middle ground, his presidency effectively aligned the
abortion debate with the two-party axis.

Carter did not ignore the rising Religious Right so much as he responded
to it with impolitic inconsistency. He made several inexplicable
mistakes---for example, not addressing the National Religious
Broadcasters annual meeting until 1980. Here, Flippen echoes the
influential, if somewhat self-serving, analysis of Southern Baptist
minister Robert Maddox, who belatedly won appointment as Carter's
religious liaison. More helpfully, Flippen describes the lively and
powerful presence of the liberal interest groups with which Carter had
to contend. (Indeed, in order to fully understand this story, we need to
learn even more about this world.) Hailing from a strikingly parochial
political background, Carter struggled mightily to negotiate his liberal
flank. He gave positions to some outspoken liberals, such as Margaret
Costanza, yet never seems to have understood them, nor they him.
Carter's skills as a broker remained arrested until his remarkable
post-presidency, which Flippen chronicles in a helpful epilogue.

On one level, Flippen's narrative functions as a dialectic: Carter's
faith-filled campaign spawned an antithesis, the Religious Right, and
their struggle made the Reagan Revolution more possible. Carter, Flippen
argues, held to "a different strain of evangelicalism," one more irenic
and more forgiving than what Jerry Falwell, et al., had to offer (20).
If, as Flippen also contends, Carter's "faith had always been his
guide," we need more work to flesh out this tradition of centrist
evangelicalism (344).

Still, as Flippen's account suggests, the Carter presidency lacked the
coherence requisite for a thesis. Carter stood alone---and in many ways
he remains an odd duck, if a sympathetic one. To shift narrative modes:
the Carter administration was laced with irony, but it probably did not
rise to the level of tragedy. Whatever literary category works best,
though, Flippen's work goes a long way toward clarifying Carter's role
in the rise of the Religious Right.
