---
layout: article
title: "Review: Slavery, Civil War, and Salvation"
author: "Joseph S. Moore"
author-note: "Joseph S. Moore is an assistant professor of history at
Gardner-Webb University."
vol: 13
year: 2011
book-reviewed: "Daniel L. Fountain. <em>Slavery, Civil War, and Salvation: African American
Slaves and Christianity, 1830-1870</em>. Baton Rouge: Louisiana State
University Press, 2010. 159 pp. ISBN 9780807136997."
---

This small book raises large questions for students of slavery, the
American South, and religion. Daniel L. Fountain successfully challenges
assumptions regarding the ubiquity of Christianity amongst American
slaves and suggests that the Christianization of most African Americans
occurred after emancipation. The book does not dispute the presence of a
"strong Christian core within the slave population," but denies that it
translated into "anything approaching universal acceptance" of Christian
belief and practice prior to the Civil War (28). In making his case,
Fountain also accomplishes two interrelated achievements. First, he adds
to scholarly discourse regarding African American religion by giving a
quantitative analysis of the qualitative data provided in the WPA slave
narratives. Second, he provides an easily digestible introduction to the
discussion of slave religions that can serve as a useful teaching
resource.

Fountain proposes the slave church, which was surprisingly small, has
eclipsed the study of slave religion and culture, which was
overwhelmingly non-Christian. To demonstrate this, the author surveys
the WPA slave narratives for signs of conversion to Christianity before
and after the Civil War. In a sample of 381 individuals, less than forty
percent evidenced Christian conversion prior to the Civil War. Work
roles and geography were negligible factors, though urban slaves were
more likely to convert than those in rural areas. Enslaved women were
slightly more prone to convert. Youth was positively correlated to
conversion before the war, representing eighty-six percent of the
sample. Equally intriguing, Fountain believes his own findings to be
inflated by the problematic nature of the WPA narratives themselves. He
suggests that other studies' projections of one-quarter to one-third of
the overall slave population might be more accurate.

After a chapter relating this statistical analysis, the book helpfully
surveys the scholarship on slave Christianity, Islam, and Voodoo, as
well as archeological insights on the re-creation of Africa in slave
communities. It suggests the explosion of African American Christianity
and misconceptions about pre-war conversion were both post-war events.
Reconstruction and Jim Crow era whites were keen to highlight their
pre-war Christian benevolence. Simultaneously, black leaders stressed a
broad black Christianity that countered racist arguments for black
inferiority. This led to a perfect storm of misinterpreting slave
religion in the antebellum period. It was in everyone's best interest to
emphasize Christianity and de-emphasize atheism, agnosticism, and
African religions prior to emancipation.

For historians, this book carries powerful, though by no means
conclusive, implications. In Fountain's account the Africanization of
Christianity, so well chronicled in other scholarship, was not
sufficient to attract a majority of slaves into the fold. Thus, for all
its cultural syncretism, the slave church was not necessarily the
central location of slave agency in the early nineteenth century. Rather
than the place to sing songs of freedom, it was for many a sign of power
and domination. Only after emancipation could the majority of African
Americans accept Christianity on their own terms. Christianity did not
lead to freedom. Freedom led to Christianity.

Fountain raises readers' awareness that a new surge of scholarship
emphasizing the complexities of slave social and cultural life is full
swell and continues to give insights that complicate the past. His
statistical voice adds to the growing cohort of historians unconvinced
that the protean nature of the "invisible institution" with its mix of
African, Caribbean, and Western religions held sway for most slaves.

Fountain speaks to an ongoing shift in the study of black Christianity.
As the work of Albert J. Raboteau, John Blassingame, and Eugene Genovese
overturned the Ulrich B. Philips model of the history of slavery, the
black church became a powerful tool for proving black agency. A younger
cohort, including Allan D. Austin, Michael A. Gomez, William J. Sweet,
and Fountain, have now de-Christianized a large segment of black agency
leaving historians with a far more complex picture. But Fountain has
also raised important questions about the limits of agency. For
instance, the availability of teaching and the attitudes of masters
played a powerful role in slave conversions. Of those who converted,
only five percent of their masters actively opposed or forbade the
Christianizing of their slaves. Amongst the unconverted, that number
rose dramatically to over thirty percent. These findings imply that the
actions of masters in limiting the gospel affected the ability of slaves
to become Christians. Equally suggestive are findings that turnout at
brush arbor meetings may have been significantly lower than the
voluminous scholarship on their existence might suggest. This was
largely because whites took great pains to successfully keep such
meetings dangerous and inconsistent.

The book's shortcomings are largely the product of its brevity. Readers
should exercise caution against taking evangelical theology too much at
its own word; not all who rejected or avoided evangelical conversion
avoided Christian society. Black churches were still vital centers of
slave life, and one need not get religion to appreciate the social value
of them. Fountain himself suggests a decoupling of attendance and faith
in future studies. This tendency to collapse the discussion of
Christianity into one of evangelical Protestantism is evident
throughout, though Fountain makes clear this is the product of taking
the slaves' religious narratives on their own terms. Black Catholicism,
which constituted a rich tradition in many parts of the antebellum
South, is disappointingly subsumed in this process.

Fountain has left us to ask important questions about slave Christianity
and the nature of religious belief itself. For many slaves, there was
Christianity by degrees and none at all, and the book suggests new
scholarship must unravel this mystery further. Those works should
emulate the author's deft blending of statistical analysis with the
voices of the enslaved themselves. The careful effort to let the
subjects' voices be heard is just one of the highlights of a book that
will inform many lively discussions, class lectures, and future
scholarship.
