[![image](../index_top_logo_.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/).

[![image](../index_top.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/)

![image](../../production/page_2_strip.jpg)

[![image](../New_Vol_13.png)](Front13.html)

Archive Volume XIII (2011) Volume XII (2010) Volume XI (2009) Katrina
(2009) Volume X (2007) Volume IX (2006) Volume VIII (2005) Volume VII
(2004) Volume VI (2003) Volume V (2002) Volume IV (2001) Volume III
(2000) Volume II (1999) Volume I (1998) Main Page

[![image](../page_2_link_4_mast.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/ed.htm)

[![image](../page_2_link_5_ed_policies.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/mission.htm)

[![image](../page_2_link_6_article_sub.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/submit.htm)

[![image](../page_2_link_7_book_rev.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/reviews.htm)

[![image](../page_2_link_8_hill_award.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/award.htm)

[![image](../page_2_link_9_advertisers.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/ads.htm)

[![image](../page_2_link_99_email.jpg)](mailto:aremillard@francis.edu)

![image](../../production/page_2_width_line_side.jpg) \
.

![image](../../production/page_2_width_line_top.jpg)

* * * * *

![image](Reviews/EvangelismAndResistance.jpg)

Cedric May. *Evangelism and Resistance in the Black Atlantic,
1760–1835*. Athens: University of Georgia Press, 2008. 157 pp. ISBN
9780820327983. Reviewed by Lincoln Mullen for the *Journal of Southern
Religion*.

* * * * *

In *Evangelism and Resistance in the Black Atlantic*, Cedric May
explores the relationship between blacks' Christian faith and their
efforts to resist slavery and racial oppression. He asks whether
Christianity was a tool used by whites to enslave blacks, or was it a
means that blacks used to resist oppression. His answer comes by
examining the literary texts written by blacks who were evangelical
Christians in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries. The
six authors that May studies are Jupiter Hammon, Phillis Wheatley, John
Marrant, Prince Hall, Richard Allen, and Maria Stewart.

These six authors, according to May, carried on a conversation over
nearly a century about Christianity and resistance. By pointing out the
connections between the authors, such as Hammon's literary response to
Wheatley's poems and the Masonic lodge where Hall and Marrant were both
members, May establishes this long conversation. He also demonstrates a
progression in the conversation from religious ideas favored by whites
to the development of distinct black theologies and religious
institutions.

* * * * *

"For each of the authors, May identifies the connection between religion
and resistance in their writings."

* * * * *

For each of the authors, May identifies the connection between religion
and resistance in their writings. Jupiter Hammon rebuked Wheatley for
her outspokenness, arguing that Christianity should lead slaves to
accept their status and see that God had used it to provide for their
conversion. Wheatley was more outspoken about resistance, criticizing
both slavery and the British empire in her poetry. John Marrant's
narrative of his conversion and ordination records how he preached
Christianity to slaves, despite the objections of their masters. Unlike
white evangelists, though, Marrant refrained from arguing that
Christianity would domesticate slaves, and instead offered a rationale
for evangelism that did not preclude resistance. Prince Hall and Richard
Allen carried developing ideas about resistance to the point of creating
separate black institutions, Hall by founding a black Masonic lodge in
Boston, and Allen by founding a black church in Philadelphia. Maria
Stewart expanded the discussion to the question of gender as well as
race discrimination.

* * * * *

"May is therefore able to understand the writers on their own terms,
rather than filtering their texts through the values and preoccupations
of later generations."

* * * * *

The chief virtues of May's book stem from his willingness to take the
religion of these authors seriously. Unlike other writers about black
resistance, May does not dismiss Hammon for advocating nonresistance or
Marrant for seldom mentioning slavery. May is therefore able to
understand the writers on their own terms, rather than filtering their
texts through the values and preoccupations of later generations. Though
some other scholars have discounted some of these writers for not
articulating resistance in as loudly as, say, David Walker did, May is
able to detect more subtle forms of resistance, in theology or ethics
rather than just in overt political acts. May is also able to deal with
a broader range of authors—men and women, Calvinists and Methodists and
Baptists.

The book is short, so May does not deal with his texts at great length;
as much of the text is taken up with background as it is with
exposition. Sometimes the book reads like the dissertation that it once
was, and the outline of the argument is not as clear as could be
desired. Since May deals exclusively with authors who wrote primarily in
North America or Great Britain, the phrase "black Atlantic" in the title
seems a bit of a stretch. Still, because of his willingness to take
religion seriously, May's work is a more expansive study of black
resistance than earlier works.

Lincoln Mullen

Doctoral Student in History

Brandeis University

**[Search *The Journal of Southern
Religion*](http://jsr.fsu.edu/search.htm)**

.

.

This site was designed by Randall J. Stephens and is maintained by Emily
Clark. © 1998-2011 by \
 *The Journal of Southern Religion*. All rights reserved. ISSN 1094-5253
