[![image](../index_top_logo_.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/).

[![image](../index_top.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/)

![image](../../production/page_2_strip.jpg)

[![image](../New_Vol_13.png)](Front13.html)

Archive Volume XIII (2011) Volume XII (2010) Volume XI (2009) Katrina
(2009) Volume X (2007) Volume IX (2006) Volume VIII (2005) Volume VII
(2004) Volume VI (2003) Volume V (2002) Volume IV (2001) Volume III
(2000) Volume II (1999) Volume I (1998) Main Page

[![image](../page_2_link_4_mast.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/ed.htm)

[![image](../page_2_link_5_ed_policies.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/mission.htm)

[![image](../page_2_link_6_article_sub.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/submit.htm)

[![image](../page_2_link_7_book_rev.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/reviews.htm)

[![image](../page_2_link_8_hill_award.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/award.htm)

[![image](../page_2_link_9_advertisers.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/ads.htm)

[![image](../page_2_link_99_email.jpg)](mailto:aremillard@francis.edu)

![image](../../production/page_2_width_line_side.jpg) \
.

![image](../../production/page_2_width_line_top.jpg)

* * * * *

![image](Reviews/LynchingAndSpectacle.jpg)

Amy Louise Wood. *Lynching and Spectacle: Witnessing Racial Violence in
America, 1890-1940*. Chapel Hill: The University of North Carolina
Press, 2009. 368 pp. ISBN 9780807871973. Reviewed by Lynn S. Neal for
the *Journal of Southern Religion*.

* * * * *

In this cultural history, Amy Louise Wood urges readers to consider, as
the book's title suggests, the relationship between lynching and
spectacle. She argues that "the cultural power of lynching—indeed, the
cultural power of white supremacy itself—rested on spectacle " (3).
Through a thematic and chronological approach, Wood analyzes the history
and function of lynching spectacles through an impressive range of
sources and topics, including public executions, religion, photography,
early moving pictures, as well as prolynching and antilynching films.
The monograph investigates how lynching was represented through diverse
visual forms and shifted from a local to a national spectacle, a
transformation which, Wood argues, "sow[ed] the seed of its own
collapse" (179).

* * * * *

"Moreover, the practice of lynching incorporated elements of Protestant
ritual—confession and testimonials—to find divine justification for
their violence and religious affirmation of their racist views."

* * * * *

The book's first two chapters place the practice of lynching within the
larger contexts of publicly sanctioned violence and religion. For
example, Wood examines how lynching, as a spectacle, borrowed much from
the practice of public executions that still occurred in the early
1900s. Lynching was also shaped by the traditions of evangelical
Christianity. Public executions, evangelical Christianity, and lynching
expressed similar concerns about crime, sin, and race in increasingly
urbanized environments. Moreover, the practice of lynching incorporated
elements of Protestant ritual—confession and testimonials—to find divine
justification for their violence and religious affirmation of their
racist views. While these chapters provide readers with insight into how
white southerners justified lynching, the next three chapters explore
its emergence as an accepted, if not celebrated, spectacle.

Chapter three investigates how lynching photographs, which obscured the
violence and chaos of lynching, provided white southerners with visual
"proof" of white superiority and unity. These images, drawing on other
photographic traditions, legitimized prolynching rhetoric and notions of
white southern masculinity. In a similar way, early moving pictures,
which depicted lynchings and legal executions, provided audiences with
the immediacy of seeing the action, while being protected by the
distance of the medium. In moving pictures viewers could embrace
"traditional rituals of popular justice and vengeance that were, in
fact, at odds with practices of modern life" (144). The spectacle of
lynching reached its height with D. W. Griffith's *The Birth of a
Nation*, the subject of chapter five. The film's cinematic style and
scope convinced many people of its historical veracity. However, Wood
emphasizes how even as some embraced the film's racist and prolynching
message, other individuals and groups, such as the NAACP, began "to
recognize that the spectacle that offered so much force to prolynching
rhetoric could be used against it" (176).

Chapters six and seven examine this shift—how antilynching activists and
Hollywood filmmakers began to use the spectacle of lynching as a way to
fight against it. For example, the NAACP began to use lynching
photographs as a way to solicit support for antilynching legislation. By
reframing lynching photographs as evidence not of white superiority, but
of white savagery, these images became a way to move viewers from apathy
to action. Likewise, Hollywood films featuring antilynching messages
(*Fury*, *They Won't Forget*, and *The Ox-Bow Incident*) urged audiences
to examine their own culpability, even as they focused on white victims
and did not directly address the issue of racism. However, "by
displacing race from the main plot, they, like so many lynching
opponents at the time, attacked lynching as an American, rather than a
white man's or a southern, travesty" (231). The monograph ends with a
brief examination lynching's demise due, in part, to this antilynching
activism.

* * * * *

"It takes seriously the power of visual culture to shape local and
national discourses about lynching and makes a valuable contribution to
this area of research."

* * * * *

This study incorporates a tremendous amount of information and provides
a thorough understanding of lynching as spectacle, which will be of
interest to scholars of American religion, the South, and American
Studies. It takes seriously the power of visual culture to shape local
and national discourses about lynching and makes a valuable contribution
to this area of research. Wood is most persuasive when situating a
visual form, whether photographs, early moving pictures, or film within
its historical milieu and conventions of understanding—or put another
way, when she is analyzing the construction of lynching as a spectacle.
However, she often slips from an analysis of production to claims about
consumption with little discussion of the difference. The homogenization
of "white southerners" and their seemingly uniform prolynching views and
experiences are less persuasive when compared with the complexity and
richness of her otherwise thoughtful argumentation. Some explicit
discussion of her methodology and approach to sources would have helped
address this concern. Further, the volume would benefit from a stronger
organizational vision. Each chapter explores interesting avenues of
influence and inquiry that I was more than happy to travel; however, the
lack of a clear roadmap and the amount of repetition in each chapter
were at times roadblocks to the monograph's effectiveness.

Lynn S. Neal

Associate Professor of Religion

Wake Forest University

**[Search *The Journal of Southern
Religion*](http://jsr.fsu.edu/search.htm)**

.

.

This site was designed by Randall J. Stephens and is maintained by Emily
Clark. © 1998-2011 by \
 *The Journal of Southern Religion*. All rights reserved. ISSN 1094-5253
