---
layout: article
title: "Review: Christian Ritual and the Creation of British Slave
Societies"
author: "Joshua Owens"
author-note: "Joshua Owens is Assistant Directory of Institutional
Assessment at Liberty University."
vol: 13
year: 2011
book-reviewed: "Nicholas M. Beasley. <em>Christian Ritual and the Creation of British Slave
Societies: 1650-1780</em>. Athens: University of Georgia Press, 2009. 223
pp. ISBN 9780820333397."
---

Nicholas Beasley's *Christian Ritual and the Creation of British Slave
Societies* provides a fascinating new account of Christian liturgy in
the Colonial South and British Caribbean. Beasley contends that
historians have traditionally been remiss with details of southern
plantation religious culture and this work offers a corrective to this
oversight. Filled with abundant details covering church hierarchy,
architecture, marriages, baptisms, and communion, this book attempts to
describe the cultural meaning of the worship practices in the
established church during times of rapidly developing slave societies.
Beasley argues that a failure to understand liturgical Christianity in
this context obscures a vital process by which societal control was
managed.

With the rapid growth of slave societies in southern culture, religious
practices took new meaning and vitality in an effort to combat
egalitarian notions. Consistent with all British colonies, southern
economic and societal growth made keeping one's "Englishness" a constant
challenge. As a response to this identity crisis, Beasley argues, the
colonies adopted and strictly applied English ritual in their forms of
worship. In the "familiar structures, repetitions, and drama of
Christian worship," white residents helped bridge the gap between their
current location and their European heritage (10). The ordering and
placement of seats was a primary tool by which colonists demonstrated
this Englishness. The increasing racial anxiety in these colonies
further divided church space use, allowing for the wealthy elite to gain
seats toward the front of the building, and forcing persons of color
toward the back or out of the building entirely. Using a blend of
anthropological and historical methods, Beasley argues that this
movement of slaves away from the middle of the congregation gave whites
"views of the pulpit and altar unimpeded by the presence of black
worshippers, who were persistent reminders of how far the plantation
colonies had diverged from colonists' lily white metropolitan ideal"
(35).

Likewise, marriage became an important religious symbol of European
elitism. In a paradoxical religious movement outside of the church,
white colonists largely used the home for marital ceremonies. While free
persons took part in marriages as well, they were usually forced to
perform these rites in public places. By privatizing and domesticating
marriage rites, the white elites "effectively evacuated it of the
spiritual egalitarianism inherent in the rite," forcing all others to
see them as outsiders (11). Baptism, too, was privatized and taken away
from church control.

Unlike marriage and baptism, however, the celebration of the Eucharist
remained within the church. Contrary to popular historical opinion,
Beasley shows it was both administered and "necessary" to Christians in
the British plantation colonies. Using vast amounts of resources,
Beasley shows how the communion table became racially separated.
Ideally, the sacrament was to be egalitarian, open to all who professed
a faith in the crucifixion. Yet, in an effort to marginalize the slave
community, and likewise elevate themselves, whites excluded persons of
color from the communion table. The Eucharistic act, Beasley concludes,
forced whites to be humble and unassuming---a trait they did not want
their slaves witnessing. The prayer book required partakers to kneel as
they received communion. This posture, Beasley contends, "was not one
that prideful planters were accustomed to assuming" (105). The argument
is incredibly well-documented and it supports the point that religion
and race were inseparable in some of these plantation colonies. While
whites looked to approach church sacraments with contrite spirits, they
did so under the larger context of racial association, which subjugated
them not to the church or to God, but to their own ideological
limitations. Church customs and sacraments were racialized and thus
limited in scope of their intended meaning.

With the beginning of the American Revolution, the sense of liturgical
"Englishness" faded, and most levels of society quickly grasped onto the
growing evangelical movement. The Episcopalian liturgy was tainted by
its association with the former imperial government, and thereby, found
itself favored only by a limited sector of the white elite. The
egalitarian voice of evangelicalism further catered to the masses who
had long-been forced outside of the established church.

While Beasley's research is exemplary, the reader may find it difficult
to place the account in any type of chronological or geographical
context. It is not uncommon to read a paragraph depicting practices
spanning across a century or more. Beasley's understanding of these
British plantation societies as a "unit of analysis" is laudable, but a
tighter movement of dates and location would improve the readability
exponentially.

Further, the practices of privatizing marriage and baptism may force the
reader to deal with larger definitions of what it means to be
"religious." Certainly elite colonists favored ritual, but the
privatizing of traditional church ordinances does not necessarily speak
to their religious devotion as much as it does their sense of racial
superiority and aversion to non-whites. Beasley's contention that
religious practice was used as a societal tool should encourage readers
to further explore sociological methods of control in colonial religious
practice. However, it may not reach so far as to convince critics of
southern religiosity that it served a broader role.

This caveat aside, Beasley has produced a remarkable new illustration of
southern liturgical culture and its adaptability to cultural, societal,
and racial transformations. Following methodological cues from Catherine
Hall, Paul Johnson, and Rhys Isaac, Beasley's work finds itself among
the growing group of redeemers of colonial southern and British
Caribbean religious life and will be a text Atlantic historians will
certainly need to wrestle with in the future.
