---
layout: article
title: "Review: Other Souths"
author: "Wesley G. Phelps"
author-note: "Wesley G. Phelps is a visiting assistant professor of
history at Sam Houston State University."
vol: 13
year: 2011
book-reviewed: " Pippa Holloway, ed. <em>Other Souths: Diversity and Difference in the U.S.
South, Reconstruction to Present</em>. Athens: University of Georgia Press,
2008. 451 pp. ISBN 9780820330525."
---

Taken together, the fifteen previously published essays in this
collection offer a new way of thinking about the history of the American
South. By focusing on the diversity of the region, contributors
interrogate race, class, gender, ethnicity, and sexuality, as well as
the interrelations among these categories. With a broad span of topics
such as disputes over the future of the Auburn University football
program, southern draft resistance during World War I, female consumers,
southern folklore, sexual delinquency, homophobia, and southern
environmental policy, this collection attempts to transform the
narrative of southern history by shifting the focus to the often
neglected components of the southern past.

For the most part, the essays included in this volume succeed at pushing
beyond the confines of the traditional narrative of southern history.
For example, by highlighting the intellectual diversity in Georgia after
World War II, Jennifer E. Brooks shows how both whites and blacks
returned from the war prepared to challenge southern racism and create a
new brand of southern politics. Lu Ann Jones uncovers the many ways
women in the rural New South shaped the nature of commerce and consumer
culture. Stacy Braukman tells the story of how a Florida anticommunist
commission transformed itself during the 1960s into an organization
determined to root out homosexual teachers in high schools and colleges.
In these and other essays, contributors call our attention to
significant yet often neglected elements of southern history.

Readers of this journal will be disappointed by the minimal attention
paid to the religious diversity of the region in this reinterpretation
of southern history. In the few instances when religion does warrant
consideration, contributors rarely consider the subject in fresh or
innovative ways. For example, readers will learn that fundamentalist
Baptist morality played a significant role in the development of a
football program at Auburn University and that religious ideas were
important in the formation of a white southern identity. Beyond these
brief mentions of religious ideology, however, the authors fail to treat
religion in the same sophisticated manner in which they discuss race,
gender, and ethnicity.

Yet historians of southern religion could benefit from this volume by
taking seriously the overarching goal of its contributors. Even if these
essays tend to neglect the rich religious diversity of the South, taken
together they do at least point the way toward integrating the region's
economic, social, and political history with religion.
