---
layout: article
title: "Review: Toward Freedom Land"
author: Justin Poché
author-note: "Justin Poché is an assistant professor of history at
the College of the Holy Cross."
vol: 13
year: 2011
book-reviewed: "Harvard Sitkoff. <em>Toward Freedom Land: The Long Struggle for Racial
Equality in America</em>. Lexington: University Press of Kentucky, 2010. 232
pp. ISBN 0813125839."
---

Any student of late twentieth century U.S. History would have a hard
time avoiding Harvard Sitkoff's influence. Over a forty year career,
Sitkoff has tracked and challenged prevailing wisdom about the black
freedom struggle, from its roots in New Deal and World War II era
activism to the economic structures and prominent political and social
leaders that shaped its trajectory. The University Press of Kentucky's
collection of his most influential articles from the 1960s to the
present offers a rich survey of this important career. They reflect, in
his words, "one historian's effort to grapple with changing times and
changing historical scholarship" (1). *Toward Freedom Land* continues
Sitkoff's career-long quest to uproot some of the most persistent
assumptions about the civil rights movement. At the same time, while he
may "aim to rile" as much as ever, the body of scholarship represented
in these essays will also ground young scholars as they grapple with the
movement's legacies and their own place within a continually
controversial civil rights literature.

Arranging the articles topically rather than chronologically, Sitkoff
opens each with an introductory reflection that situates it within his
larger career. Each preface reveals a scholar attuned to but consciously
at odds with his contemporaries' prevalent historiographical concerns.
His essays on the World War II era in particular demonstrate his
development from a young scholar "when I proudly considered myself a New
Leftist" of the 1960s to a "subtler and more complex treatment of
African American wartime behavior" in the 1990s (93). Early writing
"proudly wore my heart on its sleeve," he admits. The young historian
depicted wartime violence amid the racial conflagrations of the
late-1960s. A decade later, the constraints placed upon black protest
occupied much of his work. Yet throughout these changes he has
consistently challenged the "textbook" belief that World War II offered
a watershed in the formation of black political consciousness. Emerging
from the racial violence of the WWII years into a Cold War white
liberalism more amenable to gradual civil rights reform, black
leadership traded the possibilities of collective action and protest for
liberal alliances that moved the struggle into the courtroom. Given
these transformations, black militancy in the 1960s, he argues, had
little to do with the limited reach of WWII-era protest.

Yet despite arguing against the continuities between 1940s race
consciousness and the major movements of the 1960s, Sitkoff has also
consistently advanced a better understanding of the "long civil rights
movement" as he developed a more nuanced critique of New Deal
liberalism. His early work addressed the New Deal's general apathy
toward black suffering while later assessments unearthed aspects of
reform that worked to alleviate it. Personal initiatives of local agency
leaders and increasing pressures from the left ensured that, while
Roosevelt publicly downplayed black rights in efforts to secure southern
support, he "nevertheless acted in ways that had the unintended
consequences of laying the groundwork for the Second Reconstruction"
(27). Sitkoff's "Preconditions for Racial Change" similarly examined the
larger economic and technological environments that shaped the
possibilities and limitations of black activism. Written in the early
1970s when textbooks still credited *Brown* v. *Board* with launching
the civil rights revolution, Sitkoff challenged such claims as he
courted controversy for downplaying the efforts of individuals and
grassroots protest, "even for erasing blacks from the story." *Toward
Freedom Land* addresses these concerns while hoping to "spur some
historians to do more contextualizing and less editorializing" (11).

Indeed, throughout the book, Sitkoff addresses many of the concerns and
controversies surrounding his work in the field of black history.
Republishing lesser-known works and highlighting key elements from among
his major contributions, the book reveals a career shaped by the
personal and political struggles around him. As a Jewish New Yorker
coming of age in the 1960s, he felt the need to challenge an older
generation even as he faced criticism for being an "outsider." Essays
such as "African Americans, American Jews, and the Holocaust" reflect
some of these tensions, he acknowledges, as he examines the troubled
relationship between American Jews and black activists. Mirroring the
dominant sentiments of the time, the black leadership had to overcome "a
compound of ignorance and indifference sparked with anti-Semitism" as
they came to a common cause with victims of Nazi oppression (154). Such
works, he hoped, reflect the possibilities of political cooperation
among oppressed groups.

Sitkoff's career has also maneuvered the waning of "great man" and
institutional histories in the last two decades. Perhaps too many
scholars overcompensate for such approaches in their examination of more
localized studies, he argues. His essay on Wendell Wilkie, an early
reformer who helped link the black freedom movement to struggles against
colonialism and imperialism, remind readers of the ways civil rights
leadership shaped and articulated the experiences of the "powerless" in
everyday life. At the same time, his recent biography of Martin Luther
King demonstrates his attempt to account for both the larger ideals of
the reformer and the day-to-day struggles that those principles often
evoked. The included excerpt from his 2008 biography reveals a civil
rights leader failing in health and retreating into extramarital affairs
as his increasingly passionate antiwar stance alienated him from civil
rights allies. Depicting King "in all his humanness, not as an icon"
offers an intimate glimpse into his later career as he despaired of a
society "more concerned about tranquility and the status quo than about
justice and humanity" (198).

Sikoff's volume is one among a handful of career reflections by
historians who came of age amid the Civil Rights Movement. Such volumes
will remain valuable to scholars tempted to move beyond the "dated"
paths of an older generation as we move on to the golden shores of
"ground-up" histories of "lived experience." As we do so, *Toward
Freedom Land* reminds us "that we are hardly exempt from the
intellectual limitations we see so clearly in our predecessors" (8).
Nonetheless, we can take both challenge and comfort in his blend of
scholarly humility and daring. As we seek out new historiographical
paths and unearth the complex pasts of the voiceless, the march of
historical scholarship should encourage continued self-reflection and
debate. As Sitkoff playfully reminds us, "the beat goes on. The beat
goes on."
