[![image](../index_top_logo_.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/).

[![image](../index_top.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/)

![image](../../production/page_2_strip.jpg)

[![image](../New_Vol_13.png)](Front13.html)

Archive Volume XIII (2011) Volume XII (2010) Volume XI (2009) Katrina
(2009) Volume X (2007) Volume IX (2006) Volume VIII (2005) Volume VII
(2004) Volume VI (2003) Volume V (2002) Volume IV (2001) Volume III
(2000) Volume II (1999) Volume I (1998) Main Page

[![image](../page_2_link_4_mast.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/ed.htm)

[![image](../page_2_link_5_ed_policies.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/mission.htm)

[![image](../page_2_link_6_article_sub.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/submit.htm)

[![image](../page_2_link_7_book_rev.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/reviews.htm)

[![image](../page_2_link_8_hill_award.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/award.htm)

[![image](../page_2_link_9_advertisers.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/ads.htm)

[![image](../page_2_link_99_email.jpg)](mailto:aremillard@francis.edu)

![image](../../production/page_2_width_line_side.jpg) \
.

![image](../../production/page_2_width_line_top.jpg)

* * * * *

![image](Reviews/FlashesofaSouthernSpirit.JPG)

Charles Reagan Wilson. *Flashes of a Southern Spirit: Meanings of the
Spirit in the U.S. South.* Athens: University of Georgia Press, 2011.
249 pp. ISBN 9780820338309. Reviewed by Amanda Porterfield for the
*Journal of Southern Religion*.

* * * * *

This well-composed and gracefully written volume addresses the cultural
history of the American South, especially in its expressions of a
distinctive "southern spirit." The essays collected here are a testament
to a compelling vision of that spirit; as author of the seminal volume,
*Baptized in Blood: The Religion of the Lost Cause* (1980), editor of
two encyclopedias on southern culture, and former director the Center
for the Study of Southern Culture at the University of Mississippi, no
one has done more to define and promote cultural studies of the American
South than Charles Reagan Wilson. The current volume reveals Wilson's
interest in religion as a powerful dynamic shaping southern literature,
music, photography, and politics. It also reveals the underlying
theological purpose of his approach to southern culture.

Following a succinct and useful historiography of southern cultural
studies, the book opens with an essay, originally published in 1993,
that locates the development of southern culture as an historical
construct. In "The Invention of Southern Tradition: The Writing and
Ritualization of Southern History, 1880–1930," Wilson shows how
southerners drew from lore and memory to build an anti-modern romance
celebrating the spiritual values of their region over against the
frost-bitten and heartless materialism of the North. As southern culture
coalesced in the work of southern writers and public performers during
the late-nineteenth and early-twentieth centuries, "South" and "spirit"
became one.

* * * * *

"The presence of real evil in the South brings emotional depth to this
drama of redemption, working against any sense of southern
blamelessness."

* * * * *

Most of the essays that follow were published between 2001 and 2007 as
chapters in books establishing southern cultural studies as an academic
field. Though divided into three sections—Tradition, Creativity, and
Spirituality—these essays defy any clear division into separate spheres.
More an expression of trinitarian unity, essays gathered under the
heading of spirituality attend as much to the creative arts and biracial
tradition of southern politics as they do to religion, and Wilson's
fascination with spirituality permeates the essays gathered under the
headings of "Tradition" and "Creativity." Every one of these essays is
beautifully crafted and insightful, and none more so than "The Burden of
Southern Culture," in which the Christian sensibility of Wilson's
conception of southern culture is fully disclosed. Southern writers
worked to maintain "the image of the South as a redemptive community"
(57), Wilson explains, in which "the southern self-image has often
involved the idea of spiritual superiority to northerners" (55). The
presence of real evil in the South brings emotional depth to this drama
of redemption, working against any sense of southern blamelessness.
While slavery and white supremacy stained the region with sin, black
priests of redemption lifted up the nobility of a suffering people for
all the world to see, and with a righteousness that whites could not
command. Quoting Martin Luther King, Jr., Wilson recalls "the red hills
of Georgia" in 1963, where the "gallantry, loyalty, and pride" that
epitomized southern spirit "passed to the Negro demonstrators in the
heat of summer's battles" (58).

Imbuing the history of southern culture with spiritual shape and
direction, Wilson's attunement to the force of Christian redemption
courses through his writing. With insight that never shies from the
burdens of southern history, Wilson finds goodness nurtured in response
to evil in ways that make the South the heartland of a larger story of
American redemption. With a writer's gift for evoking the sensuality of
southern culture—from mockingbirds and magnolias to enervating heat and
physical cruelty—Wilson embraces the spiritual materialism of southern
culture as something apart from the colder materialism of empirical
investigation. Inquiry into the political and economic interests served
by cultural Christianity rarely intrudes.

* * * * *

"Wilson describes his own path from the naiveté of childhood
fundamentalism through intellectual freedom and academic achievement to
Episcopalian devotion and marital reconciliation."

* * * * *

A concluding autobiographical essay rounds out the volume, making
everything personal. Wilson describes his own path from the naiveté of
childhood fundamentalism through intellectual freedom and academic
achievement to Episcopalian devotion and marital reconciliation. The
confessional self-offering, combined with the intellectual achievement
these essays represent, would make any reviewer who called for a colder
judgment of southern culture seem churlish. But there is a need for
studies of southern culture that are not theologically driven, and
Wilson's work lays its own burden on historians who attempt to meet that
need. The grace with which Wilson envelops southern culture has an
insulating effect, leaving anyone interested in sharper scrutiny with a
taint of Yankee vulgarity.

Amanda Porterfield

Professor of Religion

Florida State University

**[Search *The Journal of Southern
Religion*](http://jsr.fsu.edu/search.htm)**

.

.

This site was designed by Randall J. Stephens and is maintained by Emily
Clark. © 1998-2011 by \
 *The Journal of Southern Religion*. All rights reserved. ISSN 1094-5253
