[![image](../index_top_logo_.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/).

[![image](../index_top.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/)

![image](../../production/page_2_strip.jpg)

[![image](../New_Vol_13.png)](Front13.html)

Archive Volume XIII (2011) Volume XII (2010) Volume XI (2009) Katrina
(2009) Volume X (2007) Volume IX (2006) Volume VIII (2005) Volume VII
(2004) Volume VI (2003) Volume V (2002) Volume IV (2001) Volume III
(2000) Volume II (1999) Volume I (1998) Main Page

[![image](../page_2_link_4_mast.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/ed.htm)

[![image](../page_2_link_5_ed_policies.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/mission.htm)

[![image](../page_2_link_6_article_sub.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/submit.htm)

[![image](../page_2_link_7_book_rev.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/reviews.htm)

[![image](../page_2_link_8_hill_award.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/award.htm)

[![image](../page_2_link_9_advertisers.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/ads.htm)

[![image](../page_2_link_99_email.jpg)](mailto:aremillard@francis.edu)

![image](../../production/page_2_width_line_side.jpg) \
 .

![image](../../production/page_2_width_line_top.jpg)

* * * * *

![image](Reviews/NewStudiesintheHistory.jpg)

Edward E. Baptist and Stephanie M. H. Camp, eds. *New Studies in the
History of American Slavery*. Athens: University of Georgia Press, 2006.
308 pp. ISBN 0820326941. Reviewed by Monica C. Reed for **** the
*Journal of Southern Religion*.

* * * * *

In his 1990 work, *African Americans in the Colonial Era,* Donald R.
Wright called for scholars to look beyond southern plantation life and
begin to investigate the history of slavery in other times and
places.****Since then, an increasing number of scholars have taken up
this challenge. Edward E. Baptist and Stephanie M. H. Camp's *New
Studies in the History of American Slavery* is an important addition to
this growing body of literature, as even the sections that focus on
slavery in the plantation South do so in innovative ways.

Baptist and Camp divided this book into three sections, each addressing
topics that have often been overlooked or oversimplified in histories of
slavery in America. In section one, "Gender and Slavery," Jennifer L.
Morgan, Sharla M. Fett, and Camp each contribute a chapter that focuses
on African women and their bodies. Morgan explains how European
descriptions of African women's bodies contributed to the development of
racialized slavery, while Fett argues that African American midwives in
the antebellum South crossed lines of race and class and therefore
maintained a liminal position in southern culture. In Camp's chapter,
she emphasizes how enslaved women and men resisted white authority by
celebrating and enjoying their bodies during illicit parties. All told,
these chapters highlight the lives of African women to provide new and
diverse perspectives on the development of the slave system and the
experience of southern slaves.

* * * * *

"By investigating how slaves saw themselves and each other, these
chapters show that enslaved men and women did not simply develop broad,
racialized, African identities, but often understood themselves in
complex ethnic terms."

* * * * *

This focus on diversity of experience continues in the second section,
"Race, Identity, and Community." By investigating how slaves saw
themselves and each other, these chapters show that enslaved men and
women did not simply develop broad, racialized, African identities, but
often understood themselves in complex ethnic terms. Herman L. Bennett
begins this section by looking outside the southern United States in his
chapter "Genealogies to a Past." In it, he draws on marriage records to
argue that African slaves in seventeenth-century Mexico often maintained
ethnic distinctions based on their place of origin long after their
forced relocation. Barbara Krauthamer also moves beyond a strictly
black/white perspective to show how escaped slave women were often
integrated into Creek society. Dylan C. Penningroth describes how
property ownership complicated not just interactions between blacks and
whites, but also relationships among enslaved people. Each of these
chapters forces us to recognize, as Penningroth wrote, that "black
people's lives involved far more than their relations with whites"(173).

The book is divided into an introduction, five thematic chapters, and an
epilogue. After an overview of evangelical identity and worship patterns
in the antebellum South, each subsequent chapter covers a significant
stage in an evangelical woman's life, including romantic courtship,
evangelical marriages, childbirth and child rearing, and the death of
family members. Stephan's strategy is "to place individual women in the
relationships that mattered most to them," including their relationships
with God, parents, siblings, in-laws, spouses, children, and, in some
cases, slaves (10). He demonstrates that each relationship offered
unique opportunities and limitations for women to experience their faith
and exercise spiritual authority.

In part three of this work, "The Politics of Culture in Slavery,"
Vincent Brown, Phillip Troutman, Edward E. Baptist, and Christopher L.
Brown authored chapters that focus on issues of political and cultural
authority and power. Vincent Brown describes different ways in which
slaves and slave owners in Jamaica understood death and how they
attempted to use these understandings in order to gain social authority
and control. The next two chapters look at language in order to better
understand salves' experiences. Troutman investigates how enslaved men
and women used sentimental language in letters to express the deep sense
of loss that accompanied forced separations and in order to guarantee
that whites would pass their messages along to the intended recipient.
Baptist also considers language by looking at WPA interviews and
describing how former slaves chose to tell their stories. He shows some
of the ways in which these histories were scripted in order to emphasize
the most salient aspects of slaves' experiences. In the final chapter,
Christopher L. Brown takes a trans-Atlantic perspective, looking how
British politics influenced the development of slavery in the empire.

* * * * *

"A strength of this work is that the contributors recognize that there
are unavoidable problems that scholars must face when studying slavery."

* * * * *

In each chapter, the authors make convincing claims without overstating
or oversimplifying their arguments. A strength of this work is that the
contributors recognize that there are unavoidable problems that scholars
must face when studying slavery. They admit that sources are limited and
can be unreliable, which makes interpreting evidence all the more
difficult. Still, the contributors do not use this as an excuse.
Instead, they take the time to provide an explanation for why they chose
to utilize certain sources and how they tried to avoid interpretative
problems. In so doing, they not only strengthen their own arguments, but
also encourage others to investigate new sources and reevaluate the
usefulness of problematic ones.

Although this volume provides a number of important insights into the
history of American slavery, quite a few chapters focus on areas outside
of the southern states. This may inspire southern historians to look
beyond this region to see how it was connected to other parts of the
Atlantic world. But those interested in a strictly regional study of the
South will find the chapters by Fett, Camp, Krauthamer, and Penningroth
more directly relevant to their work. Similarly, this volume may provide
scholars of religion with new avenues of study. However, it includes
almost no direct discussion of religion and, therefore, will be of
limited interest to those looking for a book that focuses on religion
and slavery.

Monica C. Reed

Doctoral Candidate in Religion

Florida State University

**[Search *The Journal of Southern
Religion*](http://jsr.fsu.edu/search.htm)**

.

.

This site was designed by Randall J. Stephens and is maintained by Emily
Clark. Â© 1998-2011 by \
 *The Journal of Southern Religion*. All rights reserved. ISSN 1094-5253
