---
layout: article
title: "Review: The Varieties of Women's Experiences"
author: Rebecca Sharpless
author-note: "Rebecca Sharpless is an associate professor of history at
Texas Christian University."
vol: 13
year: 2011
book-reviewed: "Larry Eugene Rivers and Canter Brown Jr., eds. <em>The Varieties of Women's
Experiences: Portraits of Southern Women in the Post-Civil War
Century</em>. Gainesville: University Press of Florida, 2009. 352 pp. ISBN
9780813034126."
---

Forty years after women's history began as a recognized field, much work
remains to be done. The efforts of women to raise their families, help
their communities, and advance their professions continue to be somewhat
unrecognized and largely under-documented. The editors and authors of
*The Varieties of Women's Experiences* admirably work to rectify this
situation by bringing to light the lives of fourteen southern women.

Most of the women in *The Varieties of Women's Experiences* are from
Florida and Georgia, and most are African American. As indicated in the
title, the biographical essays range in time from the early nineteenth
century to the 1970s, with the bulk of the topics covering the period
between 1875 and 1925. Well-documented and generally well-written essays
depict the activism of this group of women in community building,
teaching, medicine, and religion. Readers learn about Selena Sloan
Butler, who worked tirelessly for reform causes through African American
women's clubs in Atlanta. Elizabeth Benton Moore operated a school in
rural Georgia. Readers interested in religion will find particularly
rewarding explorations of the lives of Mary E. C. Day Smith, who came to
the South to teach but was licensed in the African Methodist Episcopal
Church in 1894, and Louise Cecilia Fleming, whose medical mission to the
Congo was supported by the National Baptist Foreign Mission Convention.
Religion weaves throughout many of the essays, demonstrating the ongoing
importance of organized religion in southern communities and individual
lives.

The editors posit that the diversity of the book is its strength. While
most of the essays do focus on Florida and Georgia, the others range
geographically across the South. In addition to eight African American
women, the subjects also include four privileged white Protestant women,
one white Jewish woman, and one Cubana. While the breadth of topics does
in fact reveal "the varieties of women's experiences," it does not allow
the editors to contextualize or theorize the essays in their framing
material. The introduction reveals little in terms of Florida history,
southern history, or women's history. Literary theorists refer to
volumes such as this as "recovery work": revealing texts that have for
the most part been hidden, and leaving analysis to follow. For their
efforts in recovering the stories of these fourteen women, the editors
and authors deserve much credit. Now others will be able to examine the
lives of these fourteen interesting women and seek larger patterns and
themes in southern women's lives.
