[![image](../index_top_logo_.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/).

[![image](../index_top.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/)

![image](../../production/page_2_strip.jpg)

[![image](../New_Vol_13.png)](Front13.html)

Archive Volume XIII (2011) Volume XII (2010) Volume XI (2009) Katrina
(2009) Volume X (2007) Volume IX (2006) Volume VIII (2005) Volume VII
(2004) Volume VI (2003) Volume V (2002) Volume IV (2001) Volume III
(2000) Volume II (1999) Volume I (1998) Main Page

[![image](../page_2_link_4_mast.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/ed.htm)

[![image](../page_2_link_5_ed_policies.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/mission.htm)

[![image](../page_2_link_6_article_sub.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/submit.htm)

[![image](../page_2_link_7_book_rev.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/reviews.htm)

[![image](../page_2_link_8_hill_award.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/award.htm)

[![image](../page_2_link_9_advertisers.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/ads.htm)

[![image](../page_2_link_99_email.jpg)](mailto:aremillard@francis.edu)

![image](../../production/page_2_width_line_side.jpg) \
.

![image](../../production/page_2_width_line_top.jpg)

* * * * *

![image](Reviews/GodsOwnParty.jpg)

Daniel K. Williams. *God's Own Party: The Making of the Christian
Right*. New York: Oxford University Press, 2010. 372 pp. ISBN
9780195340846. Reviewed by J. Russell Hawkins for the *Journal of
Southern Religion*.

* * * * *

In 1996, sociologist William Martin published *With God on Our Side*, a
book that became the definitive history the Religious Right. Fourteen
years later, historian Daniel K. Williams has issued a formidable
challenge to Martin's place atop the scholarship on politically
conservative evangelicals. Williams's book, *God's Own Party: The Making
of the Christian Right*, will likely become the new standard overview of
the Christian Right. To be sure, a good part of his book closely follows
the trail Martin blazed a decade and a half ago, but with Williams's
interpretation the historian has clearly surpassed the sociologist in
two key areas: breadth of sources and extended periodization.

Williams's sources are exhaustive. In constructing his study, Williams
has seemingly traversed the entire country to mine archival material
scattered in libraries and special collections along both coasts as well
as holdings in such out of the way places as Abilene, Kansas, and
Laramie, Wyoming. The author also incorporates material from dozens of
niche magazines and scores of local and national newspapers. Given the
explosion of writing—both scholarly and popular—on the Religious Right
in recent years, this book could have easily succumbed to incoherency
brought on by a surfeit of sources. To his credit, Williams masterfully
avoids this potential problem, keeping his narrative focused and tight
while demonstrating a keen eye for useful quotes and telling anecdotes.
Coming in at 276 crisply written pages (notes excluded), Williams's book
will almost certainly find its way into college classrooms for years to
come.

* * * * *

"Williams shows that the preservation of a Christian America, a hallmark
of the Christian Right in the present century, was of equal concern to
politically active fundamentalists in the opening decades of the last
century."

* * * * *

The relative brevity of *God's Own Party* is even more impressive
considering the scope of Williams's inquiry. Unlike most accounts of the
Christian Right, Williams begins his study not in the Carter Seventies,
but in the Coolidge Twenties. Indeed, repositioning the birth of the
Christian Right in the era of William Jennings Bryan rather than the
heyday of Francis Schaeffer represents the first of two major
contributions of Williams's scholarship. In this respect, Williams is
challenging popular notions that evangelicalism's love-affair with
politics began with the election of Ronald Reagan in 1980. According to
Williams, "[t]he reality is otherwise. Conservative Christians had been
politically active since the early twentieth century, and they never
retreated from the public square" (2). Williams shows that the
preservation of a Christian America, a hallmark of the Christian Right
in the present century, was of equal concern to politically active
fundamentalists in the opening decades of the last century. As Williams
describes it, Christian fundamentalists in the 1920s, much like their
latter-day descendants, saw the declension of their society at every
turn and fought against the perceived attacks on the family that came in
such forms as the loosening of sexual mores, disregard of Prohibition
and the teaching of evolution in public schools (14). Unlike their
descendants at the century's end, however, conservative Protestants in
the 1920s ultimately failed to effectively mobilize against the threat
to Christian America because of divided partisan loyalties. In other
words, the change over time that Williams identifies regarding
evangelicals and politics is not interest, but strategy. "What was new
in 1980," Williams argues, "is not evangelicals' interest in politics
but, rather, their level of partisan commitment. Evangelicals gained
prominence during Ronald Reagan's campaign not because they were
speaking out on political issues…but because they were taking over the
Republican Party" (2).

Tracing how conservative Protestants began the process of appropriating
the GOP is the second major contribution of Williams's scholarship with
this narrative comprising the lion's share of the book. In Williams's
account, the evangelical-Republican alliance began as early as the 1940s
and crystallized in two stages. During the first stage, which Williams
chronicles as running from the 1940s to the early 1960s, conservative
Protestants viewed the GOP as the best protection against the Communist
threat that they saw menacing their imagined Christian society (18-19).
Theological infighting, especially on the issues of race and ecumenism,
plagued conservative Protestants during this first stage and kept them
from becoming a staunchly unified political front.

After a period in the wilderness during the Kennedy and Johnson years
Williams argues that an evangelical political consensus emerged in the
late 1960s, thus commencing the second stage of the GOP/Christian Right
alliance. Here, Christian conservatives once again flocked to the
Republican Party, this time driven by an encroaching secularism that
they saw emanating from the Left and manifesting itself in such ways as
rising feminism, attacks on school prayer, and legalized abortion (3,
88). As Williams ably demonstrates, the alliance between conservative
Christians and the Republican Party that was renewed in the 1960s
persists unabated today with culture war issues like abortion—and
increasingly in recent years, gay rights—serving to perpetuate the close
relationship between evangelicals and the GOP.

Williams makes clear that the GOP/Christian Right relationship is by no
means a one-way street. Indeed, a recurring theme in *God's Own Party*
is that as evangelicals drew close to the Republicans, the GOP drew
close to them. In the nascent years of their relationship in the 1950s,
for instance, Republican officials reciprocated evangelical support by
adopting measures of civil religion that reaffirmed the religious
heritage of the United States (26-28). As the alliance deepened in the
1980s, Republicans continued to pay lip-service to ideas of civil
religion, while at the same time shifting to the right on social issues
to ensure evangelicals' continued support (194, 207). Williams concludes
that by the 1990s the symbiotic nature of their relationship had
resulted in an iron cage of mutuality for evangelicals and the GOP that
continues to this day: "If evangelical Christians had become
Republicans, the Republican Party had also become Christianized....
Evangelicals had become too committed to the GOP to reject a Republican
president even if they had reservations about him. And Republican
presidential candidates had become too beholden to the evangelical vote
to be able to ignore the demands of the Christian Right, because they
could not support any other demographic group" (231, 232).

* * * * *

"Narrating nearly a century of religion and politics, *God's Own Party*
is a much needed and welcomed addition to the ever-growing
historiography of American conservatism."

* * * * *

Narrating nearly a century of religion and politics, *God's Own Party*
is a much needed and welcomed addition to the ever-growing
historiography of American conservatism. In constructing such a sweeping
study, however, there are instances when Williams's breadth of coverage
comes at the expense of in-depth analysis. In places, that decision
weakens the overall interpretive purchase of the book. Readers of this
journal who are well-versed in the history of twentieth-century religion
in the South may be less than persuaded by Williams's treatment of
evangelicals, fundamentalists, and the issue of race. Indeed, given the
centrality of southerners to his story and the primacy of race within
southern religion, Williams's overall handling of race is surprisingly
underdeveloped.

In Williams's account, race seems to be an issue for the Christian Right
only insofar as it kept fundamentalists and mainstream evangelicals
divided and prevented them from capitalizing on their political
potential prior to the 1960s. On a national level, according to
Williams, fundamentalists before the mid 1960s rejected civil rights
initiatives, while evangelicals were willing to accept them (33, 48).
The categories of "fundamentalist" and "mainstream evangelical,"
however, become problematic when applied to the South where the
dichotomy between the two groups was never as stark as Williams's work
might suggest. In fact, for Williams, the major fault line between
evangelicals and fundamentalists was not on theology but on race. In the
context of the South, Williams's claim that "[s]outhern fundamentalists'
stance on segregation also separated them from most evangelicals" runs
counter to much prevailing historiographic wisdom (47). As historians
from Paul Harvey to Jane Dailey have demonstrated, a belief in God's
desire for segregation was an accepted truism that spanned the vast
majority of the theological spectrum in the South. Racially moderate
southern evangelicals such as Billy Graham—a central figure in
Williams's study—were the exception and by no stretch the rule.
Furthermore, for Williams, southern religious claims about the divine
nature of segregation are often dismissed as masks for anti-communist
politics or southern resentment of federal interference in local
matters, an interpretive move that suggests Williams does not fully
appreciate the depth and character of white southern belief in this
period.

* * * * *

"Yet in this same section, Williams points out that Falwell's private
school's establishment coincided with the same year that Lynchburg
schools were desegregated, a connection begging for analysis that
Williams chooses not to make."

* * * * *

Eliding the deep-seated pervasiveness of segregationist folk theology
among white southerners in the 1950s allows Williams to significantly
downplay the issue of race as southern evangelicals began the march to
the Republican Party at midcentury. When their political mobilization
began in earnest in the late 1960s, Williams casually suggests that
"[b]y moving beyond the blatant racism of their past, evangelicals and
fundamentalists positioned themselves for national political influence"
(92). How this past was overcome—or evidence that it in fact was—remains
outside the scope of Williams's analysis. Williams mentions, for
instance, that when Jerry Falwell inaugurated his Lynchburg Christian
Academy in 1967, the future head of the Moral Majority did not mention
race as a justification for the school's existence, a stance that
Williams claims demonstrates that "fundamentalists were no longer as
willing as they once had been to defend racial segregation" (85). Yet in
this same section, Williams points out that Falwell's private school's
establishment coincided with the same year that Lynchburg schools were
desegregated, a connection begging for analysis that Williams chooses
not to make. Similarly, Williams is content to label the 1978 IRS
attempt to challenge the tax-exempt status of Christian private schools
because of their racial exclusivity as a "seminal event in mobilizing
Christian conservatives" without explicating the implications of these
racialized motives for the Christian Right (164).

With all the ink that has been spilled in recent years about the role of
race in the conservative resurgence generally and within the Religious
Right specifically, Williams missed an opportunity to leave his
interpretive mark on the debate. For readers looking for a broad history
of the Christian Right, this book is a major contribution and its scope
is an undeniable accomplishment. Yet because of its breadth, *God's Own
Party* may very well leave other readers asking for more.

  ------------------------------
  J. Russell Hawkins
  Postdoctoral Teaching Fellow
  Indiana Wesleyan University
  ------------------------------

**[Search *The Journal of Southern
Religion*](http://jsr.fsu.edu/search.htm)**

.

.

This site was designed by Randall J. Stephens and is maintained by Emily
Clark. © 1998-2011 by \
 *The Journal of Southern Religion*. All rights reserved. ISSN 1094-5253
