[![image](../index_top_logo_.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/).

[![image](../index_top.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/)

![image](../../production/page_2_strip.jpg)

[![image](../New_Vol_13.png)](Front13.html)

Archive Volume XIII (2011) Volume XII (2010) Volume XI (2009) Katrina
(2009) Volume X (2007) Volume IX (2006) Volume VIII (2005) Volume VII
(2004) Volume VI (2003) Volume V (2002) Volume IV (2001) Volume III
(2000) Volume II (1999) Volume I (1998) Main Page

[![image](../page_2_link_4_mast.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/ed.htm)

[![image](../page_2_link_5_ed_policies.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/mission.htm)

[![image](../page_2_link_6_article_sub.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/submit.htm)

[![image](../page_2_link_7_book_rev.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/reviews.htm)

[![image](../page_2_link_8_hill_award.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/award.htm)

[![image](../page_2_link_9_advertisers.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/ads.htm)

[![image](../page_2_link_99_email.jpg)](mailto:aremillard@francis.edu)

![image](../../production/page_2_width_line_side.jpg) \
.

![image](../../production/page_2_width_line_top.jpg)

* * * * *

![image](Reviews/GodsOwnParty.jpg)

Daniel K. Williams. *God's Own Party: The Making of the Christian
Right*. New York: Oxford University Press, 2010. 372 pp. ISBN
9780195340846. Reviewed by Darren Dochuk for the *Journal of Southern
Religion*.

* * * * *

Daniel Williams could not have timed it any better. Not only has he
written a wonderfully thorough account of the Christian Right, but he
has delivered it at a moment when scholars and pundits, weary from
ongoing political happenings (see Tea Party, Michelle Bachmann, the debt
debate), have wondered aloud whether Washington will ever be free of the
pulpit and the pew. It is unlikely, he says. Not much changed in the
twentieth century and probably little will change in the twenty-first.
Just as it was in Hoover's day, so it has been in Bush's and Obama's:
millions of Americans who look to scripture and their sacred leaders
when measuring their political convictions still insist that God needs
to be heard on Capitol Hill and that the GOP is his best messenger.

* * * * *

"Based on years of painstaking research in a multitude of periodicals,
personal and political papers, and organizational records, *God's Own
Party* effectively transports the reader through time, charting the
development of Christian right-wing activism over the course of ninety
years."

* * * * *

Williams's book is more than an exercise in opportunism, though; it is
also a bright example of sound methodology, clear and concise prose, and
rigorous analysis. Based on years of painstaking research in a multitude
of periodicals, personal and political papers, and organizational
records, *God's Own Party* effectively transports the reader through
time, charting the development of Christian right-wing activism over the
course of ninety years. Bucking trends, which typically locate the roots
of this activism in the 1960s or 1970s, Williams carves out a more
ambitious path by beginning in the 1920s. It was during the Roaring
Twenties, he writes, when those who felt besieged by the forces of
secularism first "committed to the idea of a Christian nation with a
Protestant-based moral code" and politics as the way "to realize that
vision" (2). Bombarded by new secular past-times—jazz, gin, the bob
cut—evangelicals "decided to fight back," and though fractured by
partisan divides, they began reshaping the political landscape by
championing the prohibition of alcohol and evolutionary theory and
countering liberal trends on a national scale.

Skimming across the surface of these developments in five pages,
Williams employs the next 260 to unpack the two stages of sophisticated
political mobilization evangelicalism undertook after its breakout
moment. The first of these transpired during the 1940s and 1950s, when
evangelicals used ecumenical organizations like the National Association
of Evangelicals (NAE) and anti-communist activism to leverage a
relationship with the GOP. "By the early 1950s," Williams argues, "the
NAE had so closely aligned its anticommunist campaign with the GOP that
it was sometimes difficult to distinguish between the statements of
evangelical ministers and those of the Republican politicians they
supported" (21). Anticommunism was thus the glue that brought
evangelicals of all regional, denominational, and partisan heritages
closer together and closer to the GOP—and a new crop of culturally aware
preachers like Billy Graham were the primary architects of this
arrangement. While leaving plenty of room in his narrative for the
barnstorming anti-communist crusaders of Billy James Hargis and Carl
McIntire's ilk, Williams isolates Graham and his ability to identify
"Christianity with American ideals" and fashion a relationship with
Dwight Eisenhower and Richard Nixon as the critical turn in
evangelicalism's political fortunes (24). Thanks to this collaboration,
evangelicals had, by the end of the 1950s, "begun to think of
the…Republican White House as an ally in a righteous cause" (31).

By no means did they enter the 1960s completely united in their
political worldview, however. With great care, William describes the
depths of animosity and tension that kept the infighting between
separatist fundamentalists and centrist evangelicals at a healthy boil.
Readers learn of a mounting "Fundamentalist Right," fueled by southern
separatists, which took harder-edged, confrontational stands against
communism, Catholicism, and civil rights, placing it at odds with the
"Evangelical Right" of Graham's cohort. As Williams shows,
fundamentalists thrived in a Cold War atmosphere of fear, where strong
rhetoric ruled the day. But this is precisely what prevented them from
realizing a prosperous future. On one hand, their belligerence relegated
them "to the margins of American political life" (48). External
political circumstances, on the other, dulled their agenda. Politicians
did not need to pay attention to fundamentalism's voices of protest,
Williams emphasizes, because they had little "legislative influence in
Washington or among voters" (42). And so, for reasons within as well as
beyond their control, fundamentalists lost the fight that Graham's
centrism won.

With increasingly rich detail, Williams shifts his narrative into the
second stage of Christian Right politics, that which transpired between
the late 1960s and 2000, when conservatives in Graham's camp "succeeded
not only in making alliances with Republican politicians, but in
changing the agenda of the party" (3). They achieved this transformation
by turning their attention to the culture wars, trimming their extremist
edges regarding race and Catholicism, and constructing a "united front"
against "feminism, abortion, pornography, and gay rights" (3). Through
the 1970s, as legal developments in these areas seemed to undermine
their Christian values, evangelicals mounted a grassroots counterassault
in concert with national campaigns by Nixon, Jimmy Carter, and
especially Ronald Reagan. While in California they fought school board
battles to stop the teaching of sex education, in Texas and Virginia
they helped outlaw textbooks that seemed too friendly to Darwin, Dewey,
and the New Deal; while in Oklahoma and Louisiana they railed against
the ERA, in Florida they rallied against gay rights. In the process,
these Sunbelt "suburban warriors" shed some of their earlier prejudices,
devised new strategies to mobilize an interdenominational army of
activists against "secular humanist" influences in their communities and
nation's capital, and built an expansive network of organizations that
could assist the larger conservative movement and the party of Nixon and
Reagan. Williams follows a familiar path here, paved by earlier scholars
like William Martin, but his analysis of the pre-1980s period is
instructive and clearly informed by the latest in historical
scholarship.

* * * * *

"Indeed, *God's Own Party* is at its strongest in its final three
chapters, the thickest of the book. In them, Williams explores recent
developments in evangelicalism's Republican dispensation."

* * * * *

His assessment of the post-1980 period brings a greater payout. Indeed,
*God's Own Party* is at its strongest in its final three chapters, the
thickest of the book. In them, Williams explores recent developments in
evangelicalism's Republican dispensation. Through a close read of the
Reagan administration he accounts for Jerry Falwell and his follower's
mounting frustrations as they won a few symbolic victories on Capitol
Hill but lost most everything else. "Religious conservatives cheered
when Reagan proclaimed 1983 the ‘Year of the Bible,'" Williams notes,
"But the Christian Right's major goals remained elusive" (203). In order
to achieve these goals, evangelical politicos began adopting other
means. Displaying some of his most innovative research, Williams charts
Ralph Reed's recasting of Christian Right activism from an emphasis on
presidential politics to a focus on precinct-level mobilization,
congressional elections, and legislative drives. Reed was a tactician
who shunned the spotlight for the surreptitious: "‘I want to be
invisible,'" he proclaimed. "‘I do guerilla warfare. I paint my face and
travel at night. You don't know it's over until you're in a body bag.
You don't know until election night'" (230). Reed's plan drew energy
from the militancy of Randall Terry and Rousas John Rushdoony,
leadership of James Dobson and Gary Bauer, and perceived threat of Bill
Clinton's presidency, all of which Williams covers in depth. This more
savvy Christian coalition made swift strides, but ultimately overreached
when trying to remove Clinton from office. Still, its momentum found an
outlet in the presidency of George W. Bush, which proved to be
evangelicals' godsend. As Bush's appointments "made his administration
the most overtly evangelical in American history," his testimonials made
it abundantly clear that he was Christian to the core (252–253).
Following the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, as Bush became a
"wartime leader," evangelicals from coast-to-coast thus openly anointed
him "‘God's man at this hour'" (255). With this, Williams concludes,
evangelicalism's decades-long march to power was fulfilled.

Of course the march continues, something Williams acknowledges in his
epilogue, but his core initiative in writing his book was to have
readers appreciate the Christian Right and GOP's tangled history between
1920 and 2008. Williams achieves this goal. With encyclopedic range and
a judicious tone he tracks all the major characters and developments
through this long history, pausing at each pivot point to assess the
paths pursued, taken, reconsidered, and denied. Along the way readers
are reminded of some of the familiar components of this story, but also
introduced to new angles: the vexing role of Vietnam in evangelicalism's
divided political consciousness, for instance, and evangelicals'
skillful rhetorical repositioning in the post-Reagan years as an
embattled minority. To his credit, Williams never portrays the Christian
Right's march to power in straight-line terms; the movement he describes
is plagued by fits and starts whose engagement with the political is
characterized by compromise, negotiation, and contingency rather than
complete assurance.

Readers will come away from *God's Own Party* with a full view of
evangelical politicization in the twentieth century, but also with a few
lingering curiosities. Three stand out in particular, all of which grow
out of Williams's drive for comprehensiveness.

* * * * *

"Yet in condensing his treatment of the pre-World War II period to just
a few pages he's forced to adopt the dominant narrative that usually
accompanies the shortsightedness that he's trying to correct ..."

* * * * *

The first has to do with proportion. In tracking the story of the
Christian Right back to the 1920s Williams offers a corrective to
scholars' shortsightedness, which limits the long view of evangelical
political action. Yet in condensing his treatment of the pre-World War
II period to just a few pages he essentially adopts the truncated
narrative such troubling shortsightedness prescribes: namely, a story
about some angry WASPs screeching against moral vices who, upon
realizing their powerlessness, retreat into the shadows of "prophetic
speculation" until reawakening as a political force in the postwar years
(3). On one hand, this trajectory leaves readers wondering whether such
haphazard politicking is worthy of being deemed the "origin" of such a
formidable movement. If it is, what separates this dispensation of
evangelical conservatism from earlier ones—during Billy Sunday's or D.
L. Moody's heydays? On the other hand, it leaves readers wondering
whether such cursory treatment glances over too much. Had Williams
devoted more time and space to the interwar period, might he have
unearthed and unpacked more substantial evidence of a politically
charged, coordinated, and powerful evangelical citizenry that refused to
retreat? Asked another way, much has been written lately about the
religious politics stirred up by Aimee Semple McPherson, Huey Long,
labor activists in Missouri and Mississippi, Bible-believing businessmen
in Chicago and Los Angeles, and many others in their generation. Where
do Williams's subjects fall in this equation?

This first curiosity spawns a second, which has to do with perspective.
Just as historians have done a splendid job of thickening our
understanding of evangelical political awareness in the pre-World War II
period, they've also done a first-rate job of incorporating other key
actors in the story of modern conservatism and the Republican Right. In
an effort to keep his tale intact and in sync with broad, national
trends, Williams focuses mainly on preachers, who played on their
parishioners' heartstrings when sparking political change. But what
about those who played on parishioners' pocketbook concerns, or
sustained the Christian Right's momentum by way of monetary
investment—businessmen and media moguls, industrialists and middle
manager types, for instance—who worked behind the scenes? Williams
mentions a few of these individuals in passing—Campus Crusade's Bill
Bright, for example—yet those who controlled the Christian Right's purse
strings are, by and large, relegated to the periphery. Yet, is this the
proper balance? Do preachers deserve such foregrounding when they have
been more of the face than the muscle of the evangelical Right?

Finally, and in a related way, Williams must-read history provokes
questions about power and hegemony and the use of the label "Christian
Right" itself. By outlining such a full account of evangelicalism's rise
to influence, capped by George W. Bush's presidency, Williams leaves
readers utterly convinced that the Republican Right is not merely
welcoming of evangelical sensibilities, interests, and agendas but in
fact beholden to them. Those who claim secular sympathies or fiscal
priorities while still supporting something called a Republican Right
seem now to be relegated to minority status at best. Recent trends
connected to the Tea Party and GOP leadership race, in which
evangelicals and evangelicalism are everywhere, leaving pundits
befuddled, furthers Williams's point, even as they beg for further
investigation. Does the label "Christian Right," which has always
presumed a second-class status for evangelical conservatives, still hold
as an effective moniker when surveying the current political landscape?
Does it blur more than it clarifies? Likewise, as scholars dig deeper
into the history of evangelical political activism since 1920, will the
notion of a "Christian Right" hold up to scrutiny as a useful term? Or
are we at a point when evangelicalism can no longer be cordoned off so
easily as a political entity set apart, its history no longer told as
merely an addendum to (rather than centerpiece of) the political
development it has long dictated?

By steering an ambitious course, *God's Own Party* has thus raised the
possibility of much fruitful questioning and debate, even as it has
already answered so many lingering queries and doubts. This is the
ultimate proof of a book with impact.

  --------------------------------
  Darren Dochuk
  Associate Professor of History
  Purdue University
  --------------------------------

**[Search *The Journal of Southern
Religion*](http://jsr.fsu.edu/search.htm)**

.

.

This site was designed by Randall J. Stephens and is maintained by Emily
Clark. © 1998-2011 by \
 *The Journal of Southern Religion*. All rights reserved. ISSN 1094-5253
