[![image](../index_top_logo_.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/).

[![image](../index_top.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/)

![image](../../production/page_2_strip.jpg)

[![image](../New_Vol_13.png)](Front13.html)

Archive Volume XIII (2011) Volume XII (2010) Volume XI (2009) Katrina
(2009) Volume X (2007) Volume IX (2006) Volume VIII (2005) Volume VII
(2004) Volume VI (2003) Volume V (2002) Volume IV (2001) Volume III
(2000) Volume II (1999) Volume I (1998) Main Page

[![image](../page_2_link_4_mast.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/ed.htm)

[![image](../page_2_link_5_ed_policies.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/mission.htm)

[![image](../page_2_link_6_article_sub.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/submit.htm)

[![image](../page_2_link_7_book_rev.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/reviews.htm)

[![image](../page_2_link_8_hill_award.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/award.htm)

[![image](../page_2_link_9_advertisers.jpg)](http://jsr.fsu.edu/ads.htm)

[![image](../page_2_link_99_email.jpg)](mailto:aremillard@francis.edu)

![image](../../production/page_2_width_line_side.jpg) \
.

![image](../../production/page_2_width_line_top.jpg)

* * * * *

![image](Reviews/LWMarks.jpg)

Alvin O. Turner. *L. W. Marks: A Baptist Progressive in Missouri &
Oklahoma, 1862-1943.* Norman: Mongrel Empire Press, 2009. 237 pp. ISBN
9780980168433. Reviewed by Mark Wilson for the *Journal of Southern
Religion*.

* * * * *

The history of religion in the South is replete with characters who
explode the one-dimensional stereotypes of clerical leaders and
adherents as backward, ignorant rubes in fear of God, ideas, and
"progress." Author Alvin O. Turner, emeritus dean of social sciences and
humanities at East Central University, adds to our knowledge of the
region through his book on Luther Whitfield Marks (1862-1943). Little
known beyond Oklahoma Baptist circles, L. W. Marks was a pastor, civic
leader, denominational builder, businessman, and newspaperman whose
progressivism largely manifested itself in a call for cooperation among
Baptists in the state and region.

* * * * *

"Turner divides Marks' story into six chapters, outlining Marks'
background, seminary experience, newspaper adventures, pastorates, and
local political and business journeys."

* * * * *

Turner divides Marks' story into six chapters, outlining Marks'
background, seminary experience, newspaper adventures, pastorates, and
local political and business journeys. Readers interested in Southern
Baptist Convention history and denominational controversies will be
eager to learn of Marks' experience at the flagship Southern Baptist
Theological Seminary in Louisville during the controversy surrounding
president William W. Whitsitt and his writings on the historical origins
of Baptists. Marks kept a diary for twenty years, beginning with his
time at SBTS, and his perspective as a student is instructive. "For
Marks along with many earlier Whitsitt supporters," Turner concludes on
the subject, "the preservation of the convention had become the ultimate
concern" (68).

For those readers who equate progressivism with theological or social
attitudes and interpretations that challenge the status quo, Marks' life
and career will disappoint. Marks was too busy for controversy, it
seems. Progress for this Baptist was the building of capacity in
Missouri and Oklahoma for activities and institutions that would have a
lasting influence on denominational self-understanding and influence.
Turner provides a comical and instructive example: In 1910, Marks
purchased a four-horse-power Harley Davidson motorcycle for traveling
Oklahoma to sell subscriptions for the *Word & Way*newspaper. "Lookout
for us," Marks told readers, "we are liable to come puffing up to your
door at any time. Have your dollar ready, for the Word and Way, the
paper of enterprise and prompt service" (171).

Baptists in Oklahoma had only a small window of opportunity to catch a
glimpse of Marks as Baptist preacher on a Harley. After a series of
experiences with flat tires, bad roads, and worse weather, Marks
abandoned the modern invention, one of many disappointments he faced in
his career. Turner details all of these: failure of the newspaper;
Oklahoma Baptist College, another of Marks' passions, sold on the
auction block; continual and pervasive attempts to find a pastorate that
could support his family.

* * * * *

"The book is the story of a religious leader with progressive ideals in
a region where progress is not so easily attained."

* * * * *

In short, Marks' story is not one full of successes, far from it, but
the activities and life experiences that are recorded by Turner are
instructive, and we need more biographies of religious leaders who had
big dreams and plans for themselves and parishioners. Turner obviously
respects Marks and his influence on Baptists in Missouri and Oklahoma,
but the book is not a denominational hagiography. The book is the story
of a religious leader with progressive ideals in a region where progress
is not so easily attained.

Mark Wilson

Coordinator, College of Liberal Arts

Auburn University

**[Search *The Journal of Southern
Religion*](http://jsr.fsu.edu/search.htm)**

.

.

This site was designed by Randall J. Stephens and is maintained by Emily
Clark. Â© 1998-2011 by \
 *The Journal of Southern Religion*. All rights reserved. ISSN 1094-5253
