---
layout: page
title: Editorial Policies
---

*The Journal of Southern Religion* is a fully peer-reviewed academic
journal reflecting the best traditions of objective and critical
scholarship in the study of religion. As an interdisciplinary venture,
the editors invite submissions from historians, religionists,
anthropologists, sociologists, and other interested scholars. The
journal welcomes submissions on all aspects of Southern Religion but is
especially interested in publishing manuscripts that address the
following topics: 1) Regionalism in Southern Religion, e.g., Appalachia,
the Gulf Coast, South Florida and the Caribbean; 2) religious aspects of
Southern culture, e.g., Religion and cuisine, music, and Southern
literature; 3) Southern civil religion; 4) local and folk religions,
including ethnographic studies of congregations and parishes; 5)
ethnicity including immigration and slave religions; 6) religion and
race, class, disability, and gender issues in the South. Individuals
desiring to submit their research to JSR should read the [submissions
policy.](http://jsr.fsu.edu/submit.htm)

**Copyright:** All material appearing in JSR is copyrighted and all
rights are reserved. Individuals may download and print materials
appearing in JSR for their own private educational use; otherwise,
articles, essays, images, and all other materials located at the JSR web
site cannot be duplicated or reproduced by any means (electronic or
print) without prior written authorization from the editors and the
Association for the Study of Southern Religion.

**Citation:**As with print media, any use of JSR materials for scholarly
or other purposes should be properly documented. The following format
should be used:

Footnote or endnote Sam Hill, "Fundamentalism in Recent Southern
Culture: Has it Done What the Civil Rights Movement Couldn't Do?"
*Journal of Southern Religion* 1 (1998).

Bibliographic citation Hill, Sam. "Fundamentalism in Recent Southern
Culture: Has it Done What the Civil Rights Movement Couldn't Do?"
*Journal of Southern Religion*1 (1998).

Minimally, all references should contain the author's name, title, and
the name of the journal with volume and year citations. Use of the URL
(i.e., the journal's web site address, located inside the angle
brackets) is optional, but, if included, should retain the brackets. If
cited in an online publication, the appropriate URL for that site may be
linked for instant reference. Contact the [Managing
Editor](mailto:aremillard@francis.edu)for further information. All
articles, essays, reviews, etc. that appear in a given calendar year
constitute a single journal volume.

