---
layout: article
title: "Review: Southern Civil Religions"
author-first: Edward L.
author-last: Ayers
author: Edward L. Ayers
author-note: "Edward L. Ayers is president of the University of Richmond."
vol: 14
year: 2012
book-reviewed: "Arthur Remillard. <em>Southern Civil Religions: Imagining the Good Society in the Post-Reconstruction Era.</em> Athens: University of Georgia Press, 2011. 248 pp. ISBN 978-0-8203-3685-5."
---

Arthur Remillard argues that southerners wrestled over the meaning of
the "good society," appealing to transcendent conceptions of justice and
truth as they tried to imagine what the South might become after its
trials of slavery, war, and reconstruction. Despite its secular power,
he argues, the white Protestant majority could not persuade, or force,
their Jewish, Catholic, or African American neighbors to accept its
monopoly on defining that good society. And neither could white males
prevent the women of their own households from having visions of their
own.

This is a refreshing perspective, more refreshing for showing---rather
than merely asserting---the agency, resistance, and pride of those who
could not control public discourse. Remillard's book is richly populated
by a cast of real people, stubbornly unique and stubbornly unwilling to
fit into formulas. The author's gift is to allow them to speak, to give
us a chance to hear their own voices. He presents both "civil religion"
and "the South" in quotation marks, acknowledging that those words do
not mean all that they have seemed to mean in the past. He graciously
thanks those who inspired him before he gently revises, expands, and
perhaps even displaces their work. He shows that for all its apparent
power---in historiography perhaps more than in its own time and
place---the "cult" of the Lost Cause was often simply ignored by those
who did not share in its allure.

The book focuses on one corner of the South---the wiregrass region of
southern Georgia, northern Florida, and coastal Alabama. That corner
embraced enough diversity and change to capture much of what was
unfolding throughout the New South. It was a place crisscrossed by
railroads and sprinkled with towns, firmly rooted in the slave South but
pulled toward the power and money of the North, disdainful of
Reconstruction but eager to set aside hard feelings for the
reconciliation of white Americans. For Remillard, civil religion cannot
be understood without a thorough grounding in civil life; here, the
world of politics and economics serve not merely as background for the
religious story, but constitute the charged and concrete world in which
religion must live. Progress and reaction wrestle for people's secular
and sacred lives.

Remillard's account of relations between blacks and whites is searing,
filled with lynching and murder. He warns, however, that "the South's
moral and physical geography remained unsettled even though white
authority was pervasive." African American southerners defiantly
imagined a "place for themselves built on a vision of the good society
that emphasized freedom and equality" (77). The degree of uncertainty
surrounding gender and religion was perhaps more surprising. Remillard
evokes the subtle but persistent tensions surrounding ideas of moral
progress and women's place. "A devoted woman was both socially active
and socially reticent," he observes. "She was also a social progressive
and an Old South romantic" (95). Remillard captures, too, the
surprisingly large role played by Jews and Catholics in this part of the
New South. Using civil religion as his focus, he shows that "some
outsiders were not outsiders at all" (105). They made the case for their
place in American society with "alternate vision of the good society
using unique cultural resources" (169).

This portrayal of the New South is humane and affirming, clear-eyed and
yet refusing cynicism. In Remillard's hands, civil religion becomes not
a smothering uniformity but a vocabulary in which people of all
backgrounds, even in the repressive South, claimed a place for their
vision of a just America. This book is itself an example of the benefits
of a broader and more inclusive vision of what civil religion might
mean.
