---
layout: article
title: "Review: Religion Enters the Academy"
author-first: Kelly J.
author-last: Baker
author: Kelly J. Baker
author-note: "Kelly J. Baker is a lecturer in religious studies at the University of Tennessee, Knoxville."
vol: 14
year: 2012
book-reviewed: "James Turner. <em>Religion Enters the Academy: The Origins 
of the Scholarly Study of Religion in America.</em> Athens: University of 
Georgia Press, 2011. 124 pp. ISBN 978-0-8203-3740-1."
---

In *Religion Enters the Academy*, James Turner traces the earliest
American formulations of religious studies as a discipline distinct from
European forbears in both motivations and eventually practice. This
short book, based upon Turner's George H. Shriver lectures at Stetson
University, moves from colonial contact, to American "disinterest" in
what Turner terms "non-European religions," to American surveys of world
religions, to William James as the narrative's culmination (7). The aim
is to display the "specifically American background of the academic
study of religion" (7). Turner begins by examining European encounters
with indigenous peoples in the New World. He points out that the
"Spanish invaders" showed "great curiosity" as well as "confusion and
contempt" when encountering the "religions" of Native Americans (8). The
English colonists ignored the question of religion until the eighteenth
century, and French missionaries learned languages to communicate and to
convert. In spite of these early encounters often fraught with violence
and intolerance, Turner argues that "the American response to any and
all non-European religions before 1800" could be categorized as "nearly
utter disinterest" (12). What becomes clear is that Turner's formulation
of disinterest exists in the realm of study rather than lived
interactions between colonists and Native Americans, which was anything
but disinterested. This scholarly disinterest transformed into interest
in the hands of deists, seekers of the universal qualities of religious
truth. Yet deists were also not disinterested. They sought to criticize
Christianity by turning to other examples of religion globally. When
rare discussion of non-European religions by Christian ministers (like
Cotton Mather) appeared, Turner writes that it "repeated traditional,
abstract censure of treacherous Muslims and benighted heathens" (18).
Americans before 1800 lacked desire for the study of religions, but they
did not hesitate in their condemnations or caricatures of "non-European
religions."

Turner appears bothered by this lack of interest in what we now term
"world religions," especially from the intelligentsia of the American
Enlightenment. "Enlightened inquirers," he notes, "*ought* to have
hungered to know of the religions of any and every non-European culture"
(21). Turner continues, "They utterly failed to live up to our
expectations" (21). Perhaps they fail to live up to the author's
expectations of intellectual life and curiosity. What remains, according
to Turner, is that some Americans, particularly Christian ministers,
were interested in comparing Christianity and world religions for less
vaunted scholarly aims. These efforts sought to glorify the supposed
material and spiritual riches of Christianity compared to the poverty
and decline of "non-European religions." Interested comparison occurred
for more sectarian goals rather than academic ones.

The comparative streak continued through many authors of early world
religion texts in America. The Unitarian Hannah Adams, for instance,
compiled a dictionary of world religions with three revisions that began
as a "compendium of Christian disputes" but included Catholicism,
Judaism, Islam, Hinduism, paganism, and Native American religions (27).
Her *Alphabetic Compendium* (1784) proved to be "the first American
attempt to survey religions throughout the world" (28). Yet Turner is
dismissive of Adams, as he is later of Lydia Maria Child, as an amateur,
who proves not quite scholarly enough to be labeled a "pioneer" of the
academic study of religion (31). To do so would "seriously . . .
overestimate her competence" (31). To further his critique of Adams,
Turner notes that her motivation for writing was problematic as she
attempted to sort out Christian disputes and schisms. Her obvious
Christian leaning overshadows her compilation of the first American
survey text. Intriguingly, religious attachment does not seem quite as
unsettling in Turner's valorizing descriptions of male
Transcendentalists who sought universal truth in other religions to see
"how their doctrines fit with Christian teaching" (38). While male
Transcendentalists were not engaged in "disinterested scholarship,"
their approaches "ultimately had big consequences for learning" (39).
Yet he does not make the same comparison of Adams or Child. Turner
further suggests that the Reverend James Freeman Clarke's work was "far
more erudite" than Child's work because "he did not need to write
quickly to keep his pantry full" (47). Clarke appears as a "more serious
student of religions" (47). Thus, the Unitarian and Transcendentalist
approaches become the central component of Turner's argument as well as
the more likely beginnings of the academic study of religion, which is
an interestingly gendered position. Historian Bonnie Smith writes
poignantly of the assumptions about male historians as professional and
female historians as amateurs in *The Gender of History*(1998), which
Turner, unfortunately, appears to replicate here in his claims about the
seriousness of male compilers of survey texts.

In Turner's genealogy, liberal Protestantism becomes the basis of the
earliest American academic inquiries to world religions. It should be
noted that these early scholars employing disinterest or engaging other
religions respectfully still held views of Christian superiority. Even
as world religions emerged as an academic study, the "anxieties and
hopes of a liberalizing Protestantism" remained firmly entrenched (55).
This characterization of the American study of religion is a tantalizing
glimpse of the religious impulses latent in the study of religion. What
might this argument suggest about the development of the study more
largely in the U.S.? How might this claim relate to current discussions
of the study of American religions in particular?

The strongest part of *Religion Enters the Academy* is the brief history
of the professionalization of religious studies as a discipline in the
late nineteenth century at Harvard, Princeton, Boston University, and
the University of Chicago. Turner ably documents how the study of
comparative religion was "closely tied to academic world of Christian
theology and biblical studies" (63). The American Academy of Religion,
the author reminds us, was founded in 1964 emerging out of the National
Association of Biblical Instructors (63). The earliest moments of this
budding discipline focused on ideas and scriptures, which meant that
religions with texts mattered more. Non-textual or "primitive" religions
only became significant in their relationships with scriptural
traditions. The early distinctions between words and practice, history
and anthropology, still resonate in the academic study of religion
today, refracted through an endless variety of subfields and methods for
study. That legacy, however, is not Turner's concern. His work ends with
a meditation of William James's *The Varieties of Religious Experience*
(1902) as groundbreaking because of the focus on individual (interior)
religious experience, which is becoming a much more strident
conversation in the twenty-first century than it was in the early
twentieth.

Overall, Turner's volume is an intriguing study of the origins of
religious studies in America and its relationship to liberal
Protestantism that might be of use to any religious studies scholar. His
reflection proves suggestive of current conversations about what
"religious studies" is---or if the discipline should exist at all.
However, Turner's renderings of interest, disinterest, and engagement
left this reader more frustrated than enlightened as the singular focus
on "academic" approaches ignored the ways in which "religion" as a
category was worked out in encounters in everyday life. Americans were
seldom disinterested as they engaged each other and labeled what could
count as "religion."
