---
layout: article
title: "Review: Dark Faith"
author-first: Jill Paláez
author-last: Baumgaertner
author: Jill Paláez Baumgaertner
author-note: "Jill Peláez Baumgaertner is a professor of English and 
dean of humanities and theological studies at Wheaton College."
vol: 14
year: 2012
book-reviewed: "Susan Srigley, ed. <em>Dark Faith: New Essays on 
Flannery O'Connor's <em>The Violent Bear It Away</em>.</em> Notre Dame: 
University of Notre Dame Press, 2012.  219 pp. ISBN 978-0-268-04138-0."
---

An unfortunate development among many contemporary critics of the
fiction of Flannery O'Connor is a propensity to skate right over her
theology. Several examples of this oversight are extant, the most
dramatic being Brad Gooch's 2009 biography, *Flannery: A Life of
Flannery O'Connor,*which presents O'Connor's faith as a mere peripheral
and idiosyncratic aspect of her personality. Fortunately, *Dark Faith*
is not one of these books. Rather it is a collection of essays by
critics who are careful to relate O'Connor's fiction to her profoundly
Roman Catholic faith, delving deeply into her second novel, *The Violent
Bear It Away*, to reveal the intricacies of an aesthetic that is both
grounded in theology and true to the most stringent demands of the art
of fiction*.*This is a book that will appeal to the reader who has been
attracted to O'Connor's grotesque characters but who has also struggled
with the apparent darkness of her vision. As a student once said to me
after reading his first O'Connor story: "How *could* she be Christian?"
The answer is complex, but it is directly connected to the scandal of
the cross and its attendant violence. The authors of this collection of
essays start from that point of understanding and develop angles of
vision that peel open a novel permeated with both suffering and grace.

Richard Giannone shows how O'Connor has respect for the humanity of even
the darkest of sinners and the most adamant of unbelievers. In fact, he
insists, in her fiction unbelief becomes "one way to God" (31). John F.
Desmond develops the importance of the protagonist Rayber's early life
in forming him as a contradictory figure---highly rational yet subject,
because of his baptism, to feeling an overwhelming and non-rational love
that floods his being. He is a theodicist, an Ivan Karamazov, who
rejects any God who allows children to suffer. Unlike most other
critics, Desmond sees ambiguity at the end of the novel as Rayber,
knowing his child has been drowned, waits for the hurt to begin and
instead feels nothing. Desmond posits that, as is the case with so many
of O'Connor's anti-heroes, the possibility is left open that Rayber
might suddenly turn back and accept the grace of God. Another approach
to the novel is developed by Gary M. Ciuba, who explores the
pervasiveness of forsaken children in O'Connor's fiction, including *The
Violent Bear It Away*. He connects this theme with the Fall and the
soul's resulting orphan state, but he also shows that at the end of the
novel the orphan becomes a child of God.

Jason Peters emphasizes the importance in O'Connor's work of the
particular rather than the general, the concrete rather than the
abstract, and the person of Jesus rather than an abstract idea of God.
In this novel, Rayber is drawn to the abstract, and Peters demonstrates
how abstraction violently separates individuals from each other and from
themselves. Ruthann Krechel Johansen explores the influence of Simone
Weil on O'Connor, delving into Weil's thinking to consider how easy it
is for the individual to choose affliction rather than God. Scott Huelin
feels that the novel explores the question of what it means to be made
in the image of God. Focusing on three characteristics of *imago
Dei---*reason, will, and love---Huelin shows how three of the novel's
major characters embody those qualities, even if they also represent
perversion of those qualities. P. Travis Kroeker presents a strong
argument linking the novel with the apocalyptic vision of John, the
prophet, and tying this vision closely to the Eucharist and baptism.
Working not only with the title of the novel but also with the epigraph
and what he feels is the pervasiveness of the influence of the Gospel of
Matthew on the work, Karl E. Martin shows how Tarwater's prophetic
calling is transformed by his exposure to Bishop, the idiot child, who
represents the messianic kingdom of heaven. Finally, Susan Srigley, the
editor of this fine collection, explores the development within *The
Violent Bear It Away* of the doctrine of the communion of the saints
which stands side by side next to the high value placed upon the
individual soul and the necessary tension and balance between the double
movement of self-renunciation and self-fulfillment.

After immersing oneself in this rich variety of theological
points-of-view regarding O'Connor's work, one cannot help but marvel at
the depth of O'Connor's thought, the pervasiveness of God's grace in her
work, and the love she bestowed on even the most unlovely of her
characters, who all fall short of the glory of God but who, even in
their unbelief, believe.
