---
layout: article
title: "Review: Apples and Ashes"
author-first: Gina Marie
author-last: Caison
author: Gina Marie Caison
author-note: "Gina Marie Caison is an assistant professor of English at 
Georgia State University."
vol: 14
year: 2012
book-reviewed: "Coleman Hutchison. <em>Apples and Ashes: Literature, 
Nationalism, and the Confederate States of America</em>. Athens: 
University of Georgia Press, 2012. 288 pp. ISBN 978-0-8203-4244-3."
---

At times it can seem as if the U.S. Civil War overdetermines
considerations of the nineteenth-century South with all other events
subsumed into either an inevitable lead-up or a necessary postscript to
the war. While this singular focus can occlude other important events
such as Indian Removal, the Mexican-American War, and the Spanish
American War, it also manages to obscure some aspects of the Confederacy
itself. As Coleman Hutchison demonstrates in *Apples and Ashes:
Literature, Nationalism, and the Confederate States of America*,
Confederate cultural productions, particularly literary ones, have
remained significantly under-examined despite an otherwise vigorous
discourse about the meaning and legacy of the Confederate States of
America. Hutchison's study argues against the prevailing notions that
the Confederacy produced little in the way of literary material and that
even what does exist is not worth the serious scholar's time.
Withholding judgments on merit, Hutchison takes Confederate literature
seriously and does so without sidestepping important questions of race,
class, and gender in the South. He makes a compelling argument for why
studying the literature of a failed national project yields valuable
results.

In the introduction, Hutchison explains how a study of Confederate
literature illuminates questions of nationalism, vectors of a
transnational and international imagination, and issues
of futurity and memory in popular culture. The book uses these nodes of
inquiry to argue that perhaps more than any other moment, the
spectacular failure of the C.S.A. allows scholars to examine in exacting
detail the making and unmaking of a nation. Using a diverse archive that
includes novels, poetry, popular song, and other print materials,
Hutchison offers a literary analysis that draws from work in history,
religious studies, and political theory. Although *Apples and
Ashes*relies heavily upon close readings, the range of material and the
conclusions Hutchison draws should speak to scholars in disciplines
outside of literary studies.

Even though Hutchison makes the case for the extent and scholarly value
of literature produced from 1861 to 1865, he opens the study by
examining earlier material from the *Southern Literary Messenger*. He
uses this material to limn the preoccupations of the emergent southern
literary imagination as it took on the concerns of "American" literature
more broadly. In so doing, Chapter one highlights the ways in which
regional discourse contributed to "a history of the future" as it
attempted to justify an untenable racial and economic order (19).
Challenging any neat teleology of secession, Hutchison shows how
numerous events in the literary culture of the U.S. and the South,
including the publication of *Uncle Tom's Cabin* (1852), served as
catalysts for the Civil War. Catalysts, Hutchison reminds the reader,
only increase the rate of the reaction between components already
present, and venues such as the *Messenger* showcased the varied
elements of an emergent southern literary nationalism long before
secession.

From there, Hutchsion moves on to examine a variety of cultural
artifacts including Augusta Jane Evans's novel *Macaria; or Altars of
Sacrifice* (1864), numerous Confederate poems, and the popular song
"Dixie." Chapters two through four move recursively through detailed
analyses of individual genres, and from a methodological perspective,
this organizational structure allows Hutchison to make productive
speculations about the probable audiences and receptions of this body of
work. Chapter two delivers a strong argument about the dangers of
dismissing literary productions under the classification of "mere
propaganda." In Chapter three, Hutchison takes on the ways that poetry
anthologies obscure the material histories of poetic works and their
readers. Chapter four uses the single object of "Dixie" to complicate
reception and publication histories that privilege the binaries of
North/South, local/national, form/content, oral/written and
ante/postbellum. In each of these chapters, *Apples and Ashes*offers a
nuanced analysis of theories of nationalism using grounded, text-based
analyses.

The final chapter turns towards the Confederate memoir, focusing almost
exclusively on Loreta Jane Valesquez's *The Woman in Battle* (1876). It
is here that Hutchison's arguments about the Civil War as an
international phenomenon with contemporary transnational resonances most
clearly come through. Segueing from the previous chapter on "Dixie,"
this portion of the book also offers the most sustained discussion of
how Confederate literature gave rise to the civil religion of the Lost
Cause. Forgoing a conclusion, Hutchison offers a Coda to each chapter.
The coda for chapter five generously opens up more room for future
studies as Hutchison admits from the beginning that his is not
exhaustive study of Confederate literature. Rather, using *The Woman in
Battle* as a final case study, he proposes that studying this body of
work will generate new stories of the region that are less
"exceptionalistic and romantic" (202).

*Apples and Ashes* will certainly interest readers from many
disciplines. As the first study of its kind, the book breaks important
ground, but some readers may wish for more discussion of the entirety of
the literary archive in question rather than the intensive focus on a
few core examples.   However, in this case, perhaps through these close
readings we can see the relevance of this understudied body of work.
While those in literary studies will appreciate the fine-tuned textual
analysis, others may find themselves more interested in the larger
archival and theoretical questions that Hutchison poses. The book makes
a strong case for why the Confederacy matters for scholars interested in
nationalisms and transnationalisms. Most admirably, Hutchison manages to
take Confederate cultural productions seriously while not shying away
from a strong critique of the indefensible racial politics they promote.
He reminds his readers that although we may not like what this
literature says or does, it is at our own peril that we ignore its
existence.
