---
layout: article
title: "Review: American Christianities"
author-first: Bret E.
author-last: Carroll
author: Bret E. Carroll
author-note: "Bret E. Carroll is a professor of history at California State
University, Stanislaus."
vol: 14
year: 2012
book-reviewed: "Catherine A. Brekus and W. Clark Gilpin, eds. 
<em>American Christianities: A History of Dominance and Diversity</em>. 
Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2011. 544 pp. ISBN 
978-0-8078-7213-0."
---

Fifteen years ago, Thomas Tweed suggested that the time had come for
*Retelling U.S. Religious History* (1997) in ways that decentered
Christianity and proposed new narrative approaches grounded in the
realities of cultural complexity and diversity. Yet Catherine Brekus and
W. Clark Gilpin of the University of Chicago remind us in their
introduction to *American Christianities* that Christianity remains at
the center of most books on U.S. religious history, a reality only
thinly cloaked by titles that use the generic term "religion." Sparked
initially by Tweed and handful of other leading religion scholars,
Brekus and Gilpin attempt to advance the decentering process by
relocating American Christianity's dominance in this new framework.
Their hefty anthology acknowledges Christianity's ascendancy but exposes
its enormous diversity and complexity and examines how the nation's web
of Christian traditions and practices have operated in its intricate
cultural, social, and political matrix.

Two key arguments frame the book: that Christianity has shaped American
life through "diversity and debate" rather than through a single unified
message (2); and that American Christians have influenced the nation's
identity through informal coalitions and strategic alliances that have
given them the appearance of acting as a unified bloc. Any appearance or
assumption of unity not only represents an oversimplification but
effectively mystifies Christianity's place in our national life by
obscuring these complex realities. Brekus and Gilpin propose an
unpacking and demystification of a Christian presence that has been at
once "omnipresent and invisible" (1).

The book's twenty-two essays by scholars in history, religious studies,
and American studies represent a wide range of topical and
methodological lenses that the editors arrange under four broad
headings. They begin with essays examining the dynamics and driving
mechanisms of "Christian Diversity in America." Catherine Albanese's
opening piece sketches a narrative in which a colonial era diversity of
Christianities unfold while subjected to disestablishment, voluntarism,
and "combinativeness" (41--42). Michael McNally suggests that
different Native communities, in a process of religious "change" rather
than "conversion," improvised locally on a range of missionary
traditions to generate the nation's many Native American Christianities.
Timothy Lee traces a trajectory "from the coercive to the liberative"
among Asian and Latino Christians who, in the process, "help\[ed\] to
de-Europeanize American Christianity" (84). Curtis Evans uncovers the
doctrinal, denominational, class, cultural, and geographic fault lines
that define the diversity of African American Christianities despite
pressures toward uniformity imposed by the "burden of race." Jonathan
Sarna, arguing that state power has favored Christianity in the
marketplace of American religion, advises that non-Christian religions
"have enriched American Christianity" most fruitfully when competition
has been truly free (129). And James Bennett, honing in on Puritan New
England, the Second Great Awakening, the modernist-fundamentalist
controversy of the early twentieth century, and mid- to late-twentieth
century ecumenism, explores how American Christians have constantly
renegotiated their relationships with one another, in ways ranging from
violence to cooperation to compassion, amid an ever-expanding variety of
Christian expression.

Part two, "Practicing Christianity in America," considers change and
diversity in the symbols, rituals, and texts that have made up Christian
practice. W. Clark Gilpin observes Protestant and Catholic theologians
varying widely and sometimes clashing dramatically as they approach
issues of modernity from different intellectual perspectives and
denominational traditions. Sally Promey looks past the simple notion of
binary difference between Protestant and Catholic visual and material
cultures to reveal more finely grained similarities and differences
within and across individuals and groups. David Kling considers
appropriations of the biblical Exodus theme, debates over the Bible in
public education, and controversies over English translations of Bible
to expose cultural tensions about identity, status, and power in a
nation of competing Christianities and religious pluralism. Jeanne
Halgren Kilde illustrates the variety of American Christianities by
delineating differing practices of baptism, communion, and the sermon.
Edith Blumhofer identifies in the historical process of competitive
evangelizing among Catholics, Mormons, and initially dominant
Protestants a mechanism by which American Christians have sharpened
their own beliefs, tested the limits of religious freedom, clarified
religious rights, and helped fashion a public space where religious
discourse could flourish.

Part three turns attention to Christianity's interactions with American
cultural forms and institutions. Adapting to a modernizing, capitalist,
and individualistic culture, American Christians generated an expanding
diversity of interpretations by engaging in cultural debates and staking
out their respective interests. After reflecting on how
eighteenth-century evangelicals, Catholics at the turn of the twentieth
century, and the late twentieth-century Word of Faith movement responded
to the individualism, self-interest, and material emphasis of consumer
culture, Catherine Brekus proposes that capitalism has driven the
vitality and variety of American Christianities. Kristina Bross surveys
a diverse captivity narrative tradition ranging from popular frontier
tales of physical prowess that celebrate dominant groups to tentative
and hesitant personal accounts of regeneration through affliction that
make "Christian heroism possible for the relatively powerless" (319).
Jon Roberts examines how the scientific community's commitment to
naturalistic method and detachment from biblical considerations during
the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries triggered new
divisions within American Christianity as mainline Protestants,
conservative evangelicals, Christian Scientists, Holiness and
Pentecostal churches, neo-Orthodox Protestants, and neo-scholastic
Catholics responded differently to its cultural authority. Rebecca Davis
uses Norman Vincent Peale as a window into the diversity and complexity
of mid-twentieth-century Protestant heteronormativity, seeing in Peale's
therapeutic method a liberal shift away from sin-based understandings of
homosexuality and a model eventually adapted by conservative
Protestants. Stewart Hoover outlines a transformation from an
institutionalized and limited religious media presence that tacitly
assumed a Protestant establishment to a fully blown, technologically
driven media marketplace, pioneered by televangelists, that is catering
to new generations of media-oriented religious seekers, leveling the
cultural playing field, destabilizing religious authority, and radically
rebalancing power relations. And Mark Noll suggests that New World
conditions generated different American "distinctives" in the U.S.,
Mexico, and Canada (387).

The final section of the book, "Christianity and the American Nation,"
focuses on how American Christians have contributed to national
conversations about key social and political issues. Behind
colonists' responses to Quebec Act, mid nineteenth-century conflicts
between Protestants and Catholics over education, and the activities of
the Christian Right, Tracy Fessenden perceives an ongoing pattern of
pluralism that emphasizes individual rights and has thus privileged
Protestant Christianity as pluralism's "accommodating frame" (422). Dan
McKanan exhibits the diversity and hybrid character of Christian social
reform through case studies of abolitionism, the Catholic Worker
movement, and Saul Alinksy's congregation-based community
organizing---all of which have been freed by the First Amendment to
blend in their activism the broad concern of the 'church' with the zeal
of the 'sect.' Jon Pahl uses the Pequot War, Civil War, world wars, Cold
War, and war on terror to argue that a state-sanctioned religion of
patriotism has diffused the logic of Christian sacrifice across American
cultural institutions and practices, underwriting war and discouraging
hard policy questions, while also recognizing countervailing efforts to
disentangle Christianity from American militarism. Ann Braude uses
Methodist, Catholic, and Mormon positions in the woman suffrage and ERA
campaigns to explore the complicated interplay between religiously based
assertions about women's nature and evolving concepts of equality
informing definitions of U.S. citizenship. And Kathleen Flake closes
with an examination of state approaches to religious life from the
informal Protestant establishment of the nineteenth century, within
which non-Protestant groups secured First Amendment protection only by
acting Protestant through an increasing state emphasis on "procedural
fairness and substantive neutrality" that challenged Protestant power
during the twentieth century, to a "final disestablishment" in which
American Christianities are, at least in the federal courts, becoming
generalized with all other American religions and their legal status is
becoming equated with that of other social institutions (501).

This effort to relocate American Christianities culturally, socially,
politically, and legally covers a lot of ground. It gives the topic the
"fresh, rigorous, serious attention" the editors want and will no doubt
succeed in its goal "to stimulate a new conversation about America's
dominant religious tradition" (4). "Conversations" might be more
accurate, however, since, at least in the near future, attempting a
single conversation might unavoidably generate a din. Indeed, the essays
in this collection themselves suggest as much, for one can hardly glean
from them a single "history of dominance and diversity." All of them
point to the enormous diversity of American Christianities, but only
some explore strategic alliances among different Christians and few
carry their analyses to conclusions about the dynamics of Christian
dominance. In many cases, readers looking for links between diversity
and wider issues of power will have to settle for hints rather than
finding explicit proposals. Nor, with only scant exception, does the
collection pay as much attention to Christianity's engagement with
non-Christian religions as a "history of dominance" demands. Most of the
treatments of Christianity are decidedly insular, intended largely to
reveal internal diversity and debate. But these observations are
intended less as critiques than as indications of where this book points
-- as useful and perhaps necessary results of the editors' efforts,
which after all are about moving the retelling process along rather than
completing it, and about providing "not comprehensiveness but texture"
(21). Importantly, they are up front about the volume's focus on
Christianity---an essential phase in the development of the discussion.
The ambitious project of recasting the history of American
Christianities has just begun; we should be grateful to Brekus, Gilpin,
and their many collaborators for so effectively mapping a path and
taking the first steps.
