---
layout: article
title: "Review: Press, Platform, Pulpit"
author-first: Colin B.
author-last: Chapell
author: Colin B. Chapell
author-note: "Colin B. Chapell in an instructor in history at the 
University of Memphis."
vol: 14
year: 2012
book-reviewed: " Teresa Zackodnik. <em>Press, Platform, Pulpit: Black 
Feminist Publics in the Era of Reform.</em> Knoxville: University of 
Tennessee Press, 2011.  xxv, 339 pp. ISBN 978-1-57233-826-5."
---

Sojourner Truth, Ida B. Wells-Barnett, and Amanda Berry Smith are some
of the better-known African American women activists of the nineteenth
century. Yet while their names, their causes, and even their stories are
familiar to many scholars, these women are frequently mentioned as
marginal to the main political and social movements of their periods. In
*Press, Platform, Pulpit: Black Feminist Publics in the Era of Reform*,
Teresa Zackodnik encourages her readers to think beyond this
interpretation, and look instead to the ways that these women stood in
the center of the politics of their day. Additionally, Zackodnik argues
that nineteenth-century African American feminists not only appealed to
specific audiences but that they created their own "publics" (xxxv).

In order to examine these twin arguments, Zackodnik studies a variety of
women who were in the public eye over the course of the nineteenth
century. The first chapter examines a number of black preaching women
over the course of the century and the audiences they encountered.
Zackodnik argues that these preachers were not on the edges of society
during the nineteenth century. Rather, "nineteen-century African
American preaching women took their ministries to the center of American
and African American religious life" (46).

The following chapters are similarly bold in proclaiming the centrality
of female African American speakers in the nineteenth century political
realm. Chapter two moves outside the American sphere, showing how
African American speakers were received as they addressed issues of
American slavery in Great Britain. Sojourner Truth's place in the United
States, and her status as "'the' black feminist of the nineteenth
century" is the subject of Zackodnik's third chapter (94). Here, the
author tries to show how important the locations of Truth's speeches and
audiences were in creating her enduring status. In contrast to Sojourner
Truth's status as the prototypical nineteenth century black feminist,
Ida B. Wells-Barnett provides a different image for many scholars---that
of a "marginalized militant." Zackodnik attempts to challenge this
standard interpretation in chapter four, arguing that on her British
speaking tour Wells (she had not yet remarried) was far from being
marginalized; rather, she was "in the thick of British reform and a
figure of note in British newspapers" (164). The author presses the idea
that Wells was "adept at appealing to and managing an existing public in
order to gain a hearing, interest in her cause, and material support for
her politics"; no simple task considering that most of the British
public were concerned instead with "white slavery" when Wells first
arrived there (165).

The last two chapters turn to the challenges of black feminism. Chapter
five examines African American nationalism, a tradition that Zackodnik
traces to the "journalism of black women as early as the 1830s,"
arguing, "early black feminists actively created a public for their
politics in this media \[the press\]" (168). Zackodnik's concluding
chapter focuses on Frances Harper and Anna Julia Cooper's diverging
responses to the links white American women made between African
Americans and other "dependent races" (225).

Throughout the book, Zackodnik stresses the importance of place and the
ways that the remarkable women she studied crafted their speeches,
letters, articles, and other forms of communication to the audiences
they addressed. These women spoke in specific ways in order to best
communicate to their audiences. Yet, far too often, Zackodnik argues,
scholars forget this point as they examine their historical subjects.
Instead, human beings are turned into automatons that merely spit out,
albeit eloquently, a single message despite the audience in front of
them. Zackodnik's work is a wonderful reminder to combat this tendency
in interpretation.

Yet, even with this important insight, there are problems with *Press,
Platform, Pulpit.* Though Zackodnik consistently talks about the
multiple publics that these nineteenth century feminists engaged, there
is no sustained investigation of who made up the audiences and very
little done to define these separate publics (though there is a
discussion of public sphere theory). The reader is left only with the
assertion that these women really did confront multiple publics, rather
than appearing before similar types of people from different parts of
the English-speaking world. Without a clear investigation into this
problem, or a working definition of exactly what was meant by the term
"publics," it was unclear to this reader whether African American
feminists actually created their own audiences as the book argues.

Additionally, this reviewer found it troubling that *Press, Platform,
Pulpit* rarely takes into account the differences in historical context
in which these women lived. For example, when talking about Jarena Lee,
Zackodnik notes, "In 1824 Lee's itinerant ministry saw her deciding to
travel to the slaves states to preach" (8). On the following page, the
author continues with some surprise, "Remarkably, Lee's opposition to
slavery seems not to have endangered her in the south and yet her
preaching did not tempter her antislavery politics: Lee joined the
American Anti-Slavery Society in 1840" (9). The differences in the
political climate of the slave states between these years is remarkable,
yet there seems to be no difference presented in the book. In another
example, the final chapter presents a dichotomy between two women's
views on how African Americans were included in speeches on "dependent
races." However, the comparison is between the perspective of one black
woman in the 1860s and another's from the 1890s. Again, there were vast
differences in the political climate between the years immediately
following emancipation and those in the nadir. These differences,
though, are not discussed; and, strangely for a study examining black
feminists in the nineteenth century, nowhere in the volume is there a
sustained discussion of the impact of the American Civil War or
emancipation.

Yet, while there are potentially significant problems in *Press,
Platform, Pulpit*, the book offers important insights, and reminds
scholars of the importance of examining not merely the words that our
subjects say, but also to whom they were speaking.
