---
layout: article
title: "The Center for the Study of Southern Religion and Culture: A Historiographic Analysis"
author-first: Emily Suzanne
author-last: Clark
author: Emily Suzanne Clark
author-note: "Emily Suzanne Clark is a Ph.D. candidate in religion at Florida State University. She is also the managing editor and former webmaster for the <em>Journal of Southern Religion</em>."
vol: 14
year: 2012
---

Forty years ago, cultural geographer Wilbur Zelinsky published what
would be one of the first studies on religion and region. Based on his
analysis of church membership data from 1952, Zelinsky identified seven
major regions and five sub-regions in the United States. Largely based
on census data, Zelinsky's study presented a traditional view of
religion that did little to account for beliefs and practices that fell
outside the institutional walls of Christian churches. Despite this
approach, his initial geographic study demonstrated to religion scholars
that regional studies could help elucidate trends, patterns, and themes
previously unrecognized. Regional studies might also provide new or
different theoretical frameworks. One of Zelinsky's regions was the
"large Southern Region" which could be "readily identified as one in
which Baptists are strongly dominant and Methodists form persistently
large minorities." The South also contained various sub-regions of
interest, such as the "Carolina Piedmont" and "islands of
Catholics."[^1] As a cultural geographer, Zelinsky did not dig deeply
into the religious intricacies of his defined regions but rather created
a broad map. The task remained for future scholars of American religion
to investigate these regions and see if Zelinsky's geographical
classification scheme would last.

In 1973, a group of professors in the Religion Department at Florida
State University (FSU) established the Center for the Study of Southern
Religion and Culture (Center). According to the Center's advisory board,
the reasons to study southern religion and culture were relevant to the
entire nation at large. Many of the rising "evangelical Protestant
denominations" had "strong roots in the South," and the Center's
founders believed the religious culture of the region and its influence
on the rest of the country disproved the current secularization thesis
and notions of religious declension.[^2] When the Center's funding ran
out eight years later in 1981, it stopped sponsoring lectures and
symposia and ceased publication of *The Bulletin of the Center of the
Study of Southern Religion and Culture* (*Bulletin*). The Religion
Department at FSU (the Center's home base) eventually forgot it ever
existed, until the summer of 2010. While reorganizing their basement
storage space, department staff unearthed two over-stuffed file folders
containing the grant applications, the Center's small periodical, and
other printed material about the former Center. The materials in these
folders provide an image of the state of the field of southern religious
studies in the 1970s and early 1980s, as well as an opportunity to
consider how the *Journal of Southern Religion* has extended the mission
of the *Bulletin* into the 1990s and 2000s.

Originally founded by faculty members at FSU and Florida A&M University,
the Center quickly expanded to include scholars from other fields,
illustrating the Center's early interdisciplinary focus. Center director
and FSU religion professor Richard L. Rubenstein (professor of Judaism
and literature) described the Center's founding members as scholars "who
were convinced that the South had its own distinctive history, culture,
and religious life."[^3] Other members of the Center's advisory board
included Robert A. Spivey (Provost of the FSU College of Arts and
Sciences and professor of New Testament and Hellenistic studies), John
J. Carey (FSU professor of contemporary religious thought), Joe M.
Richardson (FSU history professor), John F. Priest (1967 Executive
Director of the American Academy of Religion, FSU professor of Old
Testament and Ancient Near East studies), Jerry Chance (Florida A&M
University professor of religion), and Bruce Grindal (FSU anthropology
professor). Some of the founding professors and advisory board members
studied southern culture, but much of their interest came not from their
personal research agendas but rather from living in the South.

Three years after its start, the Center applied for a grant through the
Rockefeller Foundation and received $104,000. In their successful 1976
grant application, the Center provided synopses of proposed research
topics that the grant funds would help support. These included religion
and criminology, religious life in prisons, social networks and religion
in black rural communities, and the religious status of women in the
South. The Center also hosted various symposia and conferences; for
example, Harvard theologian Harvey Cox and Yale historian Sidney
Ahlstrom each led a colloquium in the Center's earlier days. At the time
of the grant application, topics for future events included southern
folklore, oral history methodology, Cuban-American communities, and the
Lost Cause. Though these possible future topics indicate an emerging
popularity of social and cultural history, many of the published
articles in the *Bulletin* reflected an intellectual history approach.

One of the primary reasons the Center applied for grant funding was to
make the Center's activities and related research available through
print and electronic media. With the 1976 Rockefeller grant money, the
Center began to print the *Bulletin*. By 1981, the Center claimed a
circulation of eight hundred copies per issue. The list of libraries
that subscribed to the *Bulletin* included predictable southern
universities such as Auburn University, Louisiana State University, and
the University of South Carolina. But it also mailed to several
institutions outside the region, with Loyola University Chicago, Brigham
Young University, and Harvard College Library on the subscription list.
The *Bulletin* mailing list also included international subscribers: the
Instituto Nacional de Anthropogica e Historia in Coroba Mexico, National
Taiwan University Library in Taipei, and Palace of Culture and Science
in Warszawa, Poland. Reader feedback comprised part of an unsuccessful
1981 grant application, in which respondents called the *Bulletin* "very
informative," "unique," and "provocative." Theologian James H. Cone
called the "quality" of the *Bulletin* "excellent," and the contemporary
Director of Research for the National Endowment for the Humanities
called it "informative and intelligent."[^4]

For its fairly short length, the *Bulletin* covered extensive territory.
Printing three issues a year for five years (1977--1981), the Center's
*Bulletin* ranged from eight to twenty pages and contained essays,
transcripts of lectures at the Center, and book reviews. Unfortunately,
the hidden stash of Center *Bulletins* is missing a few issues, but even
with these absent publications, one can get a sense of the Center's work
and interest.[^5] In these *Bulletins* are 17 articles, six
transcriptions of Center related lectures, 13 book reviews, and three
other pieces (for example, two poems on Elvis Presley appear in Vol. 3,
No. 3). Of the 23 essays (articles and lectures), half were historical
analyses or literary criticisms, and the other half covered contemporary
issues, some with a nod to anthropological methods. Many of the landmark
texts from the late 1970s made their way in the *Bulletin*'s book
reviews, which became a standard part of the *Bulletin* starting in the
winter issue of 1978. The June 1979 issue reviewed E. Brooks
Hollifield's *The Gentlemen Theologians: American Theology is Southern
Culture, 1795--1860* (1978), which famously examined the development of
southern theology and placed it in the context of southern culture.
Albert J. Raboteau's landmark *Slave Religion: The "Invisible
Institution" in the Antebellum South* (1978) received a five-page
review, which lauded the text for its groundbreaking work and Raboteau's
dedication to the developing field of African American religion.
Furthermore, Donald Mathews's "pioneering book" *Religion in the Old
South* (1977) indeed became a "standard work" in the field, as reviewer
Leo Sandon Jr. predicted.[^6]

The articles in the *Bulletin* explored a variety of topics, but a few
subjects, patterns, or themes appeared with more frequency than others.
Of the 23 articles, four focused on race via African Americans and
African American religion, and two specifically examined slavery and
religion. One particularly noteworthy article came from historian Peter
H. Wood. Wood's award-winning *Black Majority: Negroes in Colonial
South Carolina from 1670 through the Stono Rebellion* (1974) was
pacesetting among many revisionist monographs of the 1970s that treated
slaves as subjects worthy of study and as active agents rather than
passive objects.[^7] His *Bulletin* article built on themes from *Black
Majority* and likewise focused on the colonial period. Wood's essay,
"'Jesus Christ Has Got Thee at Last': Afro-American Conversion as a
Forgotten Chapter in Eighteenth-Century Southern Intellectual History"
was a video-taped address at the Center in April 1979 later published in
the *Bulletin*. In his lecture, Wood opened with an encounter in 1769 in
South Carolina between the famous evangelist George Whitefield and a
free black man named John Marrant. Marrant became intrigued by the
"crazy man" he heard "hallooing" (Whitefield), and after hearing
Whitefield preach, Marrant was quickly converted. With this interaction
in mind, Wood tracked the early relationship between African Americans
and Christianity (and, in a way white culture in general) from the "era
of pervasive mutual distrust" (1700--1730), to "the period of initial
convergence" (1730--1760), and finally ending with "the era of black
preaching" (1760--1790). The First Great Awakening played a key role in
Wood's narrative because the early revivals introduced slaves to the
more "subversive and radical aspects of Christian doctrine," in which
"authority could be challenged through Christian doctrine itself."[^8]

Wood was hardly the only highly awarded scholar to speak at the
Center.[^9] One of the *Bulletin*'s two articles on slavery addressed
antebellum justifications for and arguments against slavery from the
standpoint of moral progress. David Brion Davis won a Pulitzer Prize in
1967 for *The Problem of Slavery in Western Culture* (1966), and the
American Historical Association's Albert J. Beveridge Award (1975) and
the Bancroft Prize (1976) for *The Problem of Slavery in the Age of
Revolution, 1770--1823* (1975).[^10] In early 1979, Davis presented a
lecture to the Center published later in the *Bulletin* on the
relationship between slavery and ideas of progress.[^11] According to
Davis, Enlightenment ideas about progress---moral, economic, and
social---informed anti-slavery arguments, proslavery religious
theorists, and anti-slave trade rhetoric.

While race was a common topic in the *Bulletin*, the problem was only
framed in terms of black/white relations or slave religion. By contrast,
Native Americans appeared once in a short November 1979 article by FSU
professor and anthropologist J. Anthony Paredes titled "Kinship and
Ethnicity among the Eastern Creek Indians."[^12] It explored the "modern
ethnic reassertiveness" of Creeks remaining in the southeast, who were
mainly the descendants of the mixed-blood "friendly" Indians of the
1813--1814 Creek Civil War. Paredes's article investigates terms such as
"kinship," "ethnicity," and "genealogy" in his attempt to understand the
meaning of these social scientific ideas in modern Creek society as they
conceptualize their own modern identity.[^13]

The "Culture" part of the Center's name largely connoted a focus on the
literary and musical arts, with three articles on southern writers and
religion.[^14] FSU religion professor Lawrence Cunningham's "Catholic
Sensibility and Southern Writers" examined the premodern
worldview---imparting "sacramental value" on the "natural world"---in
the work of Flannery O'Connor and Walker Percy.[^15] Though overtly
Catholic themes did not overwhelm their writing, Cunningham found "the
confrontation of modernity" in these works to be part of a wider
Catholic tradition. Similarly, another article argued that the "spirit
or attitude of Calvinism" filled the pages of William Faulkner's *Light
in August*, which spoke to Calvinism's larger influence on the region in
general.[^16] "The Sacred and the Profane in Flannery O'Connor's 'The
Comforts of Home'" returned again to this famed southern author's work,
though this time via Mircea Eliade's popular binary.[^17]

Other than the articles on Creek kinship and the Catholic sensibility of
southern writers, the *Bulletin* contained only one other reference to
non-Protestant religion. In 1980, the *Bulletin* reviewed Nathan M.
Kaganoff and Melvin I. Urofsky's edited volume *"Turn to the South":
Essays on Southern Jewry* (1979), a book that convinced reviewer John
Priest that "further study of the Southern Jewish experience can enhance
our understanding of the Southern experience as a whole."[^18] Still,
the Protestant focus of the *Bulletin* does not come as a surprise. As
Wilbur Zelinsky noted, evangelicalism largely presided over the
religious geography of the South, and early regional studies continued
to distinguish the South by its traditionally Protestant temper. Shortly
before the *Bulletin*'s launch, geographer James Shortridge identified a
small area of "Super Catholicism" in French Louisiana (reminiscent of
Zelinsky's "islands of Catholics"), but other than that, he
distinguished the South as an area of "intense, conservative
Protestantism."[^19] For many scholars during the Center's duration,
southern religion was overwhelmingly Protestant.

Though gender studies was still in its infancy in the 1970s, the
*Bulletin* included both a discussion of southern feminism and the
construction of contemporary southern masculinity.[^20] The March 1979
issue featured an article on "Feminist Women in the Southeast," which
was based on survey information gathered by Center-sponsored doctoral
student Carolyn Hadley. Hadley concluded that the distinctive
characteristic of southern feminists "is that they are ostracized or
considered curiosities in their immediate environments because they are
feminists at the same time that they are ostracized or considered
curiosities by feminists elsewhere because they are Southerners." Many
of the interviewed women reported that the promised legal and social
changes of the Equal Rights Amendment struggled to gain currency in the
region due to ignorance, a "Bible Belt" mentality, and "entrenched
conservatism."[^21]

The following year, the *Bulletin* featured an article by Laurin A.
Wollan Jr., an FSU School of Criminology professor, on cockfighting in
contemporary Florida. In his research, largely informed by personal
interviews and conversations with local cockfight gamblers and gamecock
breeders, Wollan raised many questions about gender, sexuality,
violence, and honor culture. Rather than answer any of these questions,
Wollan's goal was to generate discussion and introduce possibilities for
future research. In fact, Wollan asked his readers point-blank: Is
cockfighting interesting because there is something implicitly sexual
about it? While he did not provide a straightforward answer, he
presented background information on different cultural styles of
cockfighting. Wollan analyzed the various preferences for lighter, agile
birds versus heavier birds and explored debates between those favoring
artificially shorter bouts or longer, more natural fights.[^22] He found
the expression of these preferences in sexually tinged language, and
like Ted Ownby in *Subduing Satan: Religion, Recreation, and Manhood in
the Rural South, 1865--1920* (1990), Wollan called attention to the
cultivation of southern masculinity in a way that took the material
circumstance of southern life and recreation seriously.[^23]

A few articles in the *Bulletin* made sweeping regional claims about the
South rather than analyze a particular element of its religion and
culture. Samuel Hill---former Center advisory board member and current
*JSR* advisory board member---also published in the *Bulletin*. His
article "The Strange Career of Religious Pluralism in the South"
explored the implications of the conclusions cultural geographers like
Zelinsky and Shortridge made regarding religion in the South. In 1980
"religious pluralism" was hardly the buzzword it would become by the
2000s; rather, it was "understudied" during the Center's existence. Hill
notes that while the South had historically been distinguished by "the
relative absence of diversity," the region's "cultural mainstream" has
always included a variety of Protestant denominations. Despite this
Protestant mix and the small "special cases" of Catholics and Jews,
religious pluralism was not "a cultural fact" in the South until the
"abrupt and wrenching social revolution" of the 1960s, which forced the
region to confront the "inevitability" of religious pluralism. The
South, as a largely homogenous society, had a preoccupation with
stability and normativity, which further reinforced its own traditional
homogeneity. Conceptualizing the South as a fairly consistent,
Protestant-dominated region, Hill understood why southerners perceived
outsider groups who challenged the traditional "southern way of life"
and "prevailing social norms" as particularly threatening. Though
contemporary pluralism had arrived in the South and "the traditional
forms of religious monism" were "weakening," the emergence of the New
Right quelled the fears of southern traditionalists.[^24] Due to the
southern "feel" of many of the televised evangelical "Electronic Church"
ministers, many southerners could comfortably place these televangelists
within their religious culture.[^25] Part of Hill's 2009 inaugural Sam
Hill Lecture in Southern Religious History at the University of North
Carolina at Asheville returned again to the "strange career" of
pluralism in southern religion. Hill argued that the South is a region
typified by both "presence" and "absence" of diversity. Though the
region has been historically marked by "a pervasively bi-racial culture,
African and European ... the significant absence of European immigrant
sectors of the population, with their distinctive cultures" also
characterized the region in past and present.[^26]

Academics were not the only speakers who gave lectures at the Center. In
late 1977, William Styron, the noted author of *The Confessions of Nat
Turner* (1967) and *Sophie's Choice* (1979), spoke at the Center.[^27]
He was a stranger neither to southern culture nor to controversy. *The
Confessions of Nat Turner* won Styron the 1967 Pulitzer Prize and thrust
the white author of the provocative book into the not-always friendly
spotlight. Though his characterization of the historical figure in *Nat
Turner* is largely sympathetic, Styron received much criticism for the
creative liberties he took with his characters. Famed African-American
authors James Baldwin and Ralph Ellison defended Styron's portrayal, but
for other critics Styron's depiction of Turner's sexuality was too
strongly reminiscent of stereotypical, racist assumptions of depraved,
inherent black sexuality.[^28] In discussing his book at the Center,
Styron first told the audience of his childhood in the South in order to
contextualize his creative interpretation of Turner's life. While in
grammar school in Virginia, teachers and textbooks taught Styron that
Nat Turner was a "fanatical" slave who "led a terrible insurrection" and
was hanged for his "cruel deeds." Styron described his writing
experience and finished novel as an attempt "to know the Negro," unlike
the majority of southern white culture which chose to ignore the
presence of African Americans in southern culture and southern history.
He admitted to being ill-prepared for the "vehement attacks" he and the
book received, and after a decade of reflection, he had "no apologies"
for his portrayal of Turner. Styron felt his book sympathetically
depicted how Turner was a victim to the horrors of slavery and the
"absolute hegemony" of white society.[^29] Styron's visit to the Center
and his inclusion in the *Bulletin* demonstrate the political and social
stakes of research in southern culture. Both lauded and severely
criticized for his work, Styron and *Nat Turner* illustrated the
volatility of and emotionality attached to such subjects of study.
Furthermore, Styron's reflections on growing up in the South in the
1930s illuminated the dynamic nature of race in popular southern
culture.

It has been thirty years since the final *Bulletin* publication, and as
a field, the study of southern religion has greatly expanded.
Catholicism in the South, though still in need of much more scholarship,
has developed far beyond the *Bulletin*'s depiction of Catholic
sensibilities in literature.[^30] Many of the *Bulletin* pieces
investigated either white religious culture or black religious
culture---two strands of southern religion that now typically influence
one another in historical narratives.[^31] In addition to scholarship
that engaged multiple points on the black/white racial spectrum, studies
on southeastern Native American cultures and religions have also
developed from a nearly non-existent 1970s historiography.[^32] Visual
and material culture studies have also developed since the Center's
organization. However, considering how many of the now-popular "folk"
artists of the 1960s, 1970s, and 1980s were from the South, it is
noteworthy that the Center presented nothing on any religious
"self-taught" or "outsider" artists, particularly since the visual
worlds of these artists can complement the intellectual worlds of other
southerners.[^33]

With these advances in mind, the Center and its *Bulletin*s are an
academic time capsule that provides us with snapshots of the
historiography of southern religious history from the 1970s to the
present. In the inaugural issue of the *JSR* (1998), Samuel Hill opened
with an essay containing a "provocative hypothesis"---"Contemporary
Fundamentalism (since the 1970s) has changed or challenged traditional
forms of Southern culture far more than did the Civil Rights Movement
that immediately preceded it." Additionally, the growing power of
fundamentalism made "Southern religion less Southern, that is, less
culturally influenced or even less culturally captive." Fundamentalists
downplayed "the old tribalism of Southern life," for they saw the need
to live in accordance with biblical ethics as the main structuring
element of everyday life.[^34] When the Center was founded in the early
1970s, the original members were "convinced of the importance of the
South to America's economic, political, religious and cultural life."
They felt that "something new was indeed happening in the South" and
that this something "deserved scientific and scholarly attention."[^35]
This "something new" sought by the Center's founders might have been the
growing fundamentalism that Hill argued was undermining "southern-ness."
Whether or not this "southern-ness" is disappearing, fourteen volumes of
*JSR* indicate that the study of it remains strong.

[^1]: Wilbur Zelinsky, "An Approach to the Religious Geography of the
    United States: Patterns of Church Membership in 1952," *Annals of
    the Association of American Geographers*, Vol. 51, No. 2 (June
    1961): 164. Other regions included "New England," the "Midland," the
    "Upper Middle Western Region," the "Mormon Region," the "Spanish
    Catholic Region," and finally the "Western" region.

[^2]: Richard L. Rubenstein, "The Center for the Study of Southern
    Culture and Religion at FSU," Florida State, *Florida State
    University Alumni Association Magazine*, Vol. 2, No. 4 (Fall 1978):
    10--12.

[^3]: Ibid, 10.

[^4]: Richard L. Rubenstein, "Grant Proposal for *THE BULLETIN* of The
    Center for the Study of Southern Culture and Religion at The Florida
    State University." Grant proposal prepared for The Florida State
    University Foundation, 1981. Appendix A -- response to *THE
    BULLETIN*.

[^5]: It is also possible that some of the "missing" issues were never
    printed. The statistics that follow only take into account: Vol. 1,
    No. 1 (Summer 1977) and No. 2 (Fall 1977); Vol. 2, No. 1 (Summer
    1978), No. 2 (Winter 1978); Vol. 3, No. 1 (March 1979), No. 2 (June
    1979), No. 3 (November 1979); Vol. 4, No. 1 (March 1980), No. 2
    (July 1980); Vol. 5, No. 1 (March 1981).

[^6]: Leo Sandon Jr., "Rational Gentility: Review of *The Gentlemen
    Theologian: American Theology in Southern Culture, 1795--1860*,"
    *The Bulletin of the Center for the Study of Southern Culture and
    Religion*, Vol. 3, No. 2 (June 1979): 16; Robert L. Hall, "The
    Evolution of Slave Religion: Review of *Slave Religion: The
    'Invisible Institution' in the Antebellum South*," The *Bulletin of
    the Center for the Study of Southern Culture and Religion*, Vol. 3,
    No. 1 (March 1979): 14--19; Leo Sandon, Jr., "Antebellum Religion:
    Review of *Religion in the Old South*," *The Bulletin of the Center
    for the Study of Southern Culture and Religion*, Vol. 1, No. 2 (Fall
    1977): 23--24.

[^7]: Peter H. Wood, *Black Majority: Negroes in Colonial South Carolina
    from 1670 through the Stono Rebellion* (1974; New York: W.W. Norton,
    1996). *Black Majority* won the Albert J. Beveridge Award of the
    American Historical Association in 1974.

[^8]: Peter H. Wood, "'Jesus Christ Has Got Thee at Last': Afro-American
    Conversion as a Forgotten Chapter in Eighteenth-Century Southern
    Intellectual History," *The Bulletin of the Center for the Study of
    Southern Culture and Religion*, Vol. 3, No. 3 (November 1979): 1,
    3--6, 5.

[^9]: Another Pulitzer Prize winner who visited and lectured at the
    Center was Harvard psychiatrist Dr. Robert Coles who spoke on
    "Children and Ethical Conflict" in February of 1978.

[^10]: David Brion Davis, *The Problem of Slavery in Western Culture*\
    (1966; New York: Oxford University Press, 1988); David Brion Davis,
    *The Problem of Slavery in the Age of Revolution, 1770--1823* (1975;
    New York: Oxford University Press, 1999).

[^11]: David Brion Davis, "Slavery and the Idea of Progress," *The
    Bulletin of the Center for the Study of Southern Culture and
    Religion*, Vol. 3, No. 2 (June 1979): 1--9.

[^12]: This article is shorter than two lengthy book reviews featured in
    the same issue.

[^13]: J. Anthony Paredes, "Kinship and Ethnicity Among the Eastern
    Creek Indians," *The Bulletin of the Center for the Study of
    Southern Culture and Religion*, Vol. 3, No. 3 (November 1978):
    8--10.

[^14]: For an essay on music, see Van K. Brock, "Assemblies of God:
    Elvis and Pentecostalism," *The Bulletin of the Center for the Study
    of Southern Culture and Religion*, Vol. 3, No. 2 (June 1979): 9--15.

[^15]: Lawrence Cunningham, "Catholic Sensibility and Southern Writers,"
    *The Bulletin of the Center for the Study of Southern Culture and
    Religion*, Vol. 2, No. 1 (Summer 1978): 8.

[^16]: Benjamin W. Griffith III, "Calvinism in Faulkner's Light in
    August," *The Bulletin of the Center for the Study of Southern
    Culture and Religion*, Vol. 2, No. 2 (Winter 1978): 10.

[^17]: Marlene Spencer, "The Sacred and the Profane in Flannery
    O'Connor's 'The Comforts of Home,'" *The Bulletin of the Center for
    the Study of Southern Culture and Religion*, Vol. 4, No. 2 (July
    1980): 32--34.

[^18]: John Priest, *Book Review: Turn to the South, The Bulletin of the
    Center for the Study of Southern Culture and Religion*, Vol. 4, No.
    1 (March 1980), 14.

[^19]: James R. Shortridge, "A New Regionalization of American
    Religion," *Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion*, Vol. 16,
    No. 2 (June 1977): 149.

[^20]: The inclusion of these two articles is significant considering
    the state of gender studies contemporary to their publication date.
    Theories and methods specific to gender largely emerged after the
    Center's existence. See Joan Wallach Scott, "Gender: A Useful
    Category of Historical Analysis," *American Historical Review*, Vol.
    91, No. 5 (Dec 1986): pp. 1053--1075; and Judith Butler, *Gender
    Trouble* (New York: Routledge, 1990).

[^21]: Carolyn Hadley, "Feminist Women in the Southeast," *The Bulletin
    of the Center for the Study of Southern Culture and Religion*, Vol.
    3, No. 1 (March 1979): 8, 10--12.

[^22]: Laurin A. Wollan, Jr., "Questions from a Study of Cockfighting,"
    *The Bulletin of the Center for the Study of Southern Culture and
    Religion*, Vol. 4, No. 2 (July 1980): 26--32.

[^23]: Ted Ownby, *Subduing Satan: Religion, Recreation, and Manhood in
    the Rural South, 1865--1920* (Chapel Hill: University of North
    Carolina Press, 1990).

[^24]: Samuel S. Hill, Jr., "The Strange Career of Religious Pluralism
    in the South," *The Bulletin of the Center for the Study of Southern
    Culture and Religion*, Vol. 4, No. 2 (July 1980): 17, 18, 24, 25.

[^25]: Though some Americans worried that the political mobilization of
    the New Right and their influential television programs (such as
    Jerry Falwell's and Jim Bakker's) would succeed in "legislating its
    moral convictions," Hill predicted they would not experience
    widespread success. One wonders if Hill was predicting the later
    "telescandals" of the 1980s when he wrote the conclusion of this
    article. For reference to the term "telescandals," see Susan Friend
    Harding, *The Book of Jerry Falwell: Fundamentalist Language and
    Politics* (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2000).

[^26]: Sam Hill, "Tell About the South: Why Are They So Religious?" (The
    Inaugural Sam Hill Lecture in Southern Religious History, The
    University of North Carolina at Asheville, April 2009). Lecture
    transcript available at
    <http://jsr.fsu.edu/Volume12/Sam%20Hill%20Lecture.html>

[^27]: William Styron, *The Confessions of Nat Turner* (1967; New York:
    Vintage Books, 2004); William Styron, *Sophie's Choice* (1979; New
    York: Bantam Books, 1988).

[^28]: John Henrik Clarke, ed., *William Styron's Nat Turner: Ten Black
    Writers Respond* (Boston: Beacon Press, 1968).

[^29]: William Styron, "William Styron on Nat Turner," *The Bulletin of
    the Center for the Study of Southern Culture and Religion*, Vol. 2,
    No. 1 (Summer 1978): 2, 4, 5, 6.

[^30]: By looking at three generations of missionary priests in the
    Louisiana territory, Michael Pasquier's recent book *Fathers on the
    Frontier: French Missionaries and the Roman Catholic Priesthood in
    the United States, 1789--1870* (2010) demonstrated that being
    Catholic was not always easy for these French priests, and southern
    Catholicism was certainly never static. Amy L. Koehlinger's *The New
    Nuns: Racial Justice and Religious Reform in the 1960s* (2007)
    investigated how women religious in Selma understood their
    post-Vatican II responsibilities and vocations in the civil rights
    era south. The 2010 volume of JSR featured a review essay on three
    recent books investigating the relationships between Catholicism,
    the South, and Jim Crow racism; Daniel Hutchinson, "Catholics and
    Jim Crow: Recent Scholarship on Southern Catholicism during the
    Civil Rights Movement," *Journal of Southern Religion,* Vol. XII
    (2010):
    <http://jsr.fsu.edu/Volume12/Catholics%20and%20Jim%20Crow%20Review%20Essay.html>.

[^31]: The work of Paul Harvey, Edward J. Blum, and James B. Bennett are
    good examples of the latter. Paul Harvey, *Redeeming the South:
    Religious Cultures and Racial Identities Among Southern Baptists,
    1865--1920* (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1997)
    and *Freedom's Coming: Religious Culture and the Shaping of the
    South from the Civil War through the Civil Rights Era* (Chapel Hill:
    University of North Carolina Press, 2005); Edward J. Blum,
    *Reforging the White Republic: Race, Religion, and American
    Nationalism, 1865--1898* (Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University
    Press, 2005); James B. Bennett, *Religion and the Rise of Jim Crow
    in New Orleans* (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2005).

[^32]: James Merrell, Joel Martin, Theda Perdue, Greg O'Brien, and
    others have demonstrated how nations like the Cherokee, Catawba,
    Muskogee, or Choctaw adapted with, responded to, and rebelled
    against their changing region. James H. Merrell, *The Indians' New
    World: Catawbas and Their Neighbors from European Contact Through
    the Era of Removal* (New York: W. W. Norton, 1991); Joel Martin,
    *Sacred Revolt: The Muskogee's Struggle for a New World* (Boston:
    Beacon Press, 1991); Theda Perdue, *Cherokee Women: Gender and
    Culture Change, 1700--1835* (Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press,
    1999); Greg O'Brien, *Choctaws in a Revolutionary Age, 1750--1830*
    (Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 2005).

[^33]: The same year the Center received its Rockefeller grant, God told
    the sixty year old Reverend Howard Finster to "paint sacred art."
    Though his northwestern Georgia Paradise Garden---a four-acre park
    full of his art---became more popular throughout the 1980s, helped
    in part by *Rolling Stone* and *Esquire* magazines, Finster obtained
    folk art fame in the late 1970s. While the Center held symposia and
    printed the *Bulletin*, folk art exhibits at major art museums
    featuring the work of various southern artists were popular both
    regionally and nationally. Though absent from the *Bulletin*'s
    pages, the visual worlds of these artists can complement the
    intellectual worlds of other southerners. The religious self-taught
    art of Finster, Sister Gertrude Morgan, and Clementine Hunter are
    indicative of southern folk art's tendency to abound in Protestant
    evangelical themes, and recently art historians and southern
    historians have used the folk art of earlier decades to further
    understand southern religious cultures. For some current
    scholarship, see Carol Crown, ed., *Coming Home! Self-Taught
    Artists, the Bible, and the American South* (Jackson: University
    Press of Mississippi, 2004). This book contains thoughtful and
    engaging essays by historians such as Paul Harvey, Ericka Lee Doss,
    and Charles Reagan Wilson on the intersections of religion and race
    in southern "folk" art. Additionally, Harvey recently spoke in the
    [first JSR podcast][] about using folk art as historical evidence in
    his recent book *Moses, Jesus, and the Trickster in the Evangelical
    Sout*h (Athens: University of Georgia Press, 2012.

[^34]: Sam Hill, "Fundamentalism in Recent Southern Culture: Has it Done
    What the Civil Rights Movement Couldn't Do?" *Journal of Southern
    Religion*, Vol. 1 (1998): <http://jsr.fsu.edu/essay.htm>.

[^35]: Rubenstein, "The Center for the Study of Southern Culture and
    Religion at FSU," 10.

  [first JSR podcast]: {{site.base-url}}/new-media/podcast/paul-harvey.html
