---
layout: article
title: "Review: Almost Free"
author-first: Abigail
author-last: Cooper
author: Abigail Cooper
author-note: "Abigail Cooper is a Ph.D. candidate in history at the University of Pennsylvania."
vol: 14
year: 2012
book-reviewed: "Eva Sheppard Wolf, <em>Almost Free: A Story about Family
and Race in Antebellum Virginia</em>. Athens: University of Georgia Press, 2012. 192 pp. ISBN 978-0-8203-3230-7."

---


This is a story of one slave and his family told through legal
petitions. The first petition succeeded: mixed-race tavern waiter Samuel
Johnson of Warrenton, Virginia, won his legal freedom and permission to
remain in Virginia as a free person of color in 1812. Every subsequent
petition Johnson filed failed. Legal freedom for his wife and daughter,
both of whom he came to own, was of the "almost" variety. In piecing
together a narrative from a sparse but evocative source base of deeds,
wills, tax records, court papers, and an astonishing eleven petitions to
the Virginia state legislature to facilitate the Johnson family's legal
freedom, Eva Sheppard Wolf has performed a valuable service. She forges
through the record that *is* available rather than "fret over the
difficulties of telling Samuel Johnson's story" from a paucity of texts
(2). Wolf's slim, accessible story will be a welcome contribution to
undergraduate seminars and lay readers looking for a manageable read,
and teachers will appreciate the way Wolf takes us through the process
of dissecting and connecting sources. There is an interactive quality to
this book that guides the reader through the revelatory petitions text
by text. Wolf then dexterously contextualizes them with her knowledge of
Virginia law and custom as it progresses from the late eighteenth
century through the 1840s. Wolf deserves special congratulation for
doing something much harder than it looks---telling a story. Still, Wolf's
effort raises questions about the limitations of exercises in historical
imagination and the tensions that emerge between historical empathy and
historical analysis.

Oriented toward a broad audience, *Almost Free* wears its scholarly
engagement lightly. She pushes back against Ira Berlin's classic
characterization of free blacks as "slaves without masters," seeking to
portray Samuel Johnson as surprisingly independent (51). But this is not
an argument-driven book. Instead, it draws on her previous work, *Race
and Liberty in the New Nation: Emancipation in Virginia from the
Revolution to Nat Turner's Rebellion* (2006). There, Wolf first examined
Samuel Johnson, inspired by his persistence in trying to liberate his
family. *Almost Free* digs deeper into this story, exposing the fluid
nature of race in Virginia. Specifically, Wolf seeks to problematize the
slavery-freedom binary by exploring all the "almosts." She interprets
family and home as the foremost motivating forces in Samuel Johnson's
legal actions, and she utilizes genealogical tools to emphasize family
and to give Johnson the personal history that slavery threatened to
obliterate.

As the story goes, Samuel Johnson bought his freedom with five hundred
dollars, saved from tips. He bought his wife and children soon after,
and they became his slaves. His son died; his efforts then focused on
freeing his wife and daughter. Complicating matters was an 1806 law that
required manumitted slaves to leave Virginia within a year after they
had been liberated. Violators risked being sold back into slavery.
Pennsylvania and permanent freedom were only 80 miles away, but Fauquier
County, Virginia, was home. Johnson was a property owner, and he had
powerful white friends. As Wolf explains, he "challenged the notion that
Virginia belonged to white people" and gambled that white patronage in a
slave state was better than residence in a "free state where white
people would have little reason to pay them any special attention or
offer any help" (107--108)---a testament to how both geographical
identification and white patronage stand at the center of this story. As
a man yearning for legitimacy and respectability, Johnson took the only
action available---petitioning the state legislature to make an exception
to allow his family to remain in Virginia after he emancipated them.
Johnson himself was illiterate, but an impressive array of white elites
spoke on his behalf as "loyal Diligent sober accommodating faithful and
honest" (93). And his daughter Lucy, who came into the foreground as his
wife aged and passed, became known over time as "a respectable & useful
member of this Community" (109). Johnson emancipated his daughter just
as she was about to be married to a free man of color. She remained in
the state with her husband and had a family of her own, living in
violation of the 1806 residency law. As the Virginia establishment
clamped down on the free black community in the wake of Nat Turner's
Rebellion, Lucy's husband, suspected of distributing abolitionist
literature, fled to Pennsylvania and did not return. Samuel Johnson's
petitions then turned toward securing a divorce for his daughter and
distancing himself from abolitionist ill repute. Lucy did remarry (a
slave) and remained in Faquier County, but her freedom was always
precarious, more secure through custom than law. After Samuel Johnson's
death, Lucy and her family moved to Washington, D.C., and Wolf proceeds
to track her progeny into the present day.

While this book has much to commend it, it also has some significant
flaws. At the outset, Wolf calls this work "an act of \[historical\]
imagination," declaring her desire to grant Samuel Johnson his "rightful
place in the grand American story" (xi). She invites readers to use
their own critical abilities to recognize that she has been necessarily
selective in her interpretations of evidence. She also invites the
reader to make Johnson's journey a personal one, invoking an exercise in
historical empathy that is both instructive and troubling. She succeeds
in giving dimension to a historically marginalized character, but in her
enthusiasm, she molds Johnson into a hero beyond reproach.

Furthermore, Wolf's critical analysis of race and family will disappoint
scholars. She seeks to highlight the fluidity and contingency of race in
daily life, but the story of Samuel Johnson and his genealogy threatens
to leave the reader with a far different impression---the power and
desirability of whiteness. Johnson's privileges are predicated on
loyalty to the white community. By 1942, a Johnson descendant passed for
white, "perhaps something that Samuel Johnson had yearned to do" (137).
This is a problematic speculation not because it lacks plausibility
among Wolf's many "perhaps," but because it stands alone on the book's
penultimate page without the rigorous analysis such a statement begs.
Here, narrative and imagination, especially framed as inspirational
story, make for dubious history---the linear progression of a legacy
elides the subjectivity of genealogical technology. It becomes clear
that "race" is "slippery" when skin color is ambiguous; race "matters"
in descendants' lives when they fail to make the obituary column of the
*Washington Post* (137). Scrutinizing Wolf's selectivity is crucial---Lucy,
for instance, is unfailing as the dutiful daughter. What Wolf interprets
as Lucy's choice could well be compulsion. The hierarchy and coercion of
"family" is invisible. If race is an unstable category for Wolf, family
is a remarkably stable one. Family is made by blood and
marriage---nuclear, male-headed, two-parent, loving. Samuel Johnson works
tirelessly for the good of his family; Spencer Malvin, Lucy Johnson's
abolitionist husband, deserts his family, and promptly becomes the
story's villain. Wolf emphasizes Samuel Johnson's role as devoted
father, minimizing his role as master. In a good teacher's hands, these
tensions could lead to fruitful discussion. But Wolf leaves much of the
analytical heavy lifting to the reader.

The relationship between race and family in the African American
experience is due for reassessment. Wolf admirably highlights how human
intimacies blurred legal lines. More than anything, her own imaginative
adventurousness should push more scholars to grapple with the shards of
evidence so that we might recover the history silenced by the
selectivity of the textual record.
