---
layout: article
title: "Review: Sam Jones' Own Book"
author-first: Joe
author-last: Creech
author: Joe Creech
author-note: "Joe Creech is director of the Lilly Fellows Program at 
Valparaiso University."
vol: 14
year: 2012
book-reviewed: "Sam P. Jones. <em>Sam Jones' Own Book: A Series of 
Sermons</em>. Reissued with a new introduction by Randall J. Stephens. 
Columbia: University of South Carolina Press, 2009. 539 pp. ISBN 
978-1-57003-827-3."
---

The title---*Sam Jones' Own Book*---points loudly and with wit to the
style and manner of the author. It is "Sam Jones'" not "The Rev. Samuel
P. Jones'" book, marking Jones's emphasis on his connection to common
folk guided by conscience not book learning or, in Christian matters,
doctrine or decree, conference or council. It is his *own* *book*, the
emphasis on *own* a subtle rebuke to those who---and there were
many---imagined him not up to the task. It is his *own*
story---literally beginning with his autobiography and then moving to
sermons that seek foremost to *testify* to God's acts in his *own* life,
not to church pronouncements or even biblical exegesis. The title thus
bears witness to Jones's ability to convey so much with so few words.

The University of South Carolina Press has published the first reissue
of *Sam Jones' Own Book* since its first edition in 1887. At that time,
Jones was regarded the "Moody of the South." After Dwight L. Moody's
death in 1899 and up until Jones's untimely death in 1906, Jones was the
best-known evangelist in America. Jones was born in 1847 in Alabama to a
slave owning family of middling wealth that moved to Cartersville,
Georgia, in 1857. Jones first studied law and was admitted to the
Georgia bar in the 1860s, but finding salvation from sin---his favorite
of which was drink---at his father's deathbed, he became a Methodist
minister and by the middle of the 1880s was preaching to overflowing
crowds at revival meetings. Randall J. Stephens, author of the book's
new introduction and *The Fire Spreads: Holiness and Pentecostalism in
the American South* (2008), notes that although widely known in his
time, Jones is largely forgotten today. Unlike his contemporary, Moody,
Jones did not innovate theologically as did Moody with
dispensationalism, premillennialism, and Keswick holiness; neither did
he build lasting institutions.

The sermons in *Sam Jones' Own Book* offer a window into his ideals and
style as well as into the wider public discourse of southern evangelism
in the late nineteenth century. Though he preached hell and the devil,
he did so with humor and sarcasm rather than fire and brimstone.
Primarily a storyteller, Jones captured sentiments with pithy sayings
added at the end of each sermon---we are told he coined the phrase, "the
road to hell is paved with good intentions" (xii). His was a "sunny
gospel" that stressed testimony, common sense, sentimentality, and
anti-elitism (xiv). This anti-elitism and sentimentality, along with the
"coarse" nature of his wit and the common vernacular with which he
preached, drew, not surprisingly, criticism from elites like Mark Twain
as well as from those favoring their gospel message in the King's
English (xiv). In terms of content, the sermons reveal little interest
in biblical exegesis or the exploration of doctrine. Most stress the
impact of conversion on the way one should live. "Quit Your
Meanness"---his most famous sermon---captures this sentiment, which, as
Stephens notes, marked his affinity with the emerging holiness movement.

From Stephens, and also from Kathleen Minnix's *Laughter in the Amen
Corner: The Life of Evangelist Sam Jones* (1993), we learn something of
Jones's wider significance and context. Jones was typical of southern
minsters of his station on race. While always claiming "to be friend to
the colored race," he supported Jim Crow, opposed miscegenation, and was
ambivalent on black disfranchisement and lynching (Minnix, 201).
Politically he was a friend of Populists like Tom Watson but generally
remained committed to laissez faire, pick-yourself-up-by-the-bootstrap
capitalism that linked financial struggle to sinful living. On other
matters he was more unique. According to Minnix, even though he was a
staunch nativist, even a xenophobe, he was surprisingly irenical towards
Roman Catholics and Jews. Although he opposed evolution, heresy, and
especially the manufacture, distribution, and use of alcohol, he did not
run in northern Fundamentalist circles, neither did he profess what
would become the doctrine of biblical inerrancy, believing instead in
"progressive theology," a position that moved him to be quite forward
looking on women's rights, especially the right to preach (Minnix,
122--27).
