---
layout: article
title: "Review: St. Mark's and the Social Gospel"
author-first: Carolyn R.
author-last: Dupont
author: Carolyn R. Dupont
author-note: "Carolyn R. Dupont is an assistant professor of history at 
Eastern Kentucky University."
vol: 14
year: 2012
book-reviewed: "Ellen Blue. <em>St. Mark's and the Social Gospel: 
Methodist Women and Civil Rights in New Orleans, 1895&ndash;1965</em>. 
Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press, 2011. 303 pp. ISBN 
978-1-57233-824-1."
---

*St. Mark's and the Social Gospel: Methodist Women and Civil Rights in
New Orleans* tells the story of a community center and the women who
staffed it over seven decades. Motivated by their faith, these white,
middle-class, southern women lived among New Orleans's poor, became
involved in their lives, and served their spiritual and physical needs.
Ellen Blue's presentation of these women and their work upends many
received assumptions about the character, chronology, and regional basis
of the Social Gospel movement, and it makes important contributions to
gender, religious, and civil rights history. In particular, scholars
often identify the Social Gospel too exclusively with northern male
leaders---thinkers and writers like Walter Rauschenbusch, Josiah Strong,
and Washington Gladden---and end the movement with the onset of World
War I, when these leaders died. As Blue demonstrates, however, the
Social Gospel resonated powerfully with a significant group of women in
the Southern Methodist Church (MECS). Through service in the office of
deaconess, they lived out this understanding of their faith well into
the middle decades of the twentieth century, and they often challenged
the racial boundaries that many male leaders preferred to leave intact.

Beginning in 1895, the women of St. Mark's offered a variety of services
to the poor and immigrant communities around them. Initially conducting
home visitations and Bible studies among the poor and isolated, the
center expanded over the years to employ several full-time staff and to
offer health and dental care, child care, community education, and
"wholesome" recreation opportunities. Blue effectively demonstrates that
these women's work undermines the argument that Social Gospel
practitioners reinforced racial boundaries and paternalistic modes of
service. As the community around St. Mark's changed, the center
maintained somewhat fluid racial practices in a segregated setting. For
example, light-skinned blacks who could "pass" for white enjoyed access
to programs and services with the full knowledge of the staff. In a
remarkable exception to its otherwise general observation of
segregation, St. Mark's health care clinic served a clientele about
one-third black, and did so without maintaining racially distinct
waiting rooms, examination facilities, or instruments.

Since most of St. Mark's records have been lost, Blue faces a formidable
obstacle in telling this story. Though she demonstrates thorough and
painstaking research in a variety of material, this dearth of necessary
sources limits her ability to describe these women's lives in detail and
to make well-supported arguments about the effects of their work. The
narrative often feels disjointed and difficult to follow. This problem
is especially acute on the issue of civil rights, despite the suggestion
in the subtitle that the book will focus on this topic. Blue describes
the racially progressive impulses that came from many Methodist women
and their national organizations, and her subjects' ideological
commitments to racial equality seem clear. However, the story does not
offer much rich detail on *activity* they pursued in New Orleans to make
racial equality a reality. When the story reaches the civil rights
years, it tends to focus on the work of male leaders with only
tangential connections to St. Mark's, like James Dombrowski of the
Southern Conference Educational Fund. Blue devotes an entire chapter on
this period on St. Mark's pastor, Rev. Lloyd Anderson Foreman. Despite
extraordinary hostility from New Orleans whites, Foreman walked his
five-year-old daughter to William Frantz Elementary school every day
after it integrated and most whites forsook the school. The pastor's
story is rich, and Blue critically entertains the variety of forces at
work in it---his theology, church politics within the Louisiana
Methodist conference, and popular sentiment. Yet, we want more about the
women she hoped to put at the center of this account, and learn only
that they supported Foreman. They showed courage by continuing to live
at the center in spite of a flood of hate mail and vigilante violence,
but there simply seems to be no record of sustained, direct civil rights
activism on the part of these women. Their work at St. Mark's in the
civil rights years apparently differed little from what they had offered
all along. Indeed, in the end, St. Mark's did not integrate until 1965,
and even then, only as the result of financial pressure that overcame
the conservative resistance of the board.

Blue has examined many themes that other scholars will want to flesh
out. Future accounts may want to examine the ways that the work and
thought of these deaconessses shaped ordinary lay Methodist women who
worked actively in Methodist Women's organizations. Her discussion of
how these women's work and ideas fit in the Wesleyan tradition also
offers an important point of departure for other scholars, given that
conservative Methodists who overtly favored segregation also laid claim
to the theological heritage of the Wesleys. In sum, *St. Mark's and the
Social Gospel* demonstrates the rich nuances of the story of gender,
religion, and racial equality and points to how much we have to learn
about the ways white religion shaped the path and progress of black
civil rights.
