---
layout: article
title: "Review: Native Americans, Christianity, and the Reshaping of the 
American Religious Landscape"
author-first: Clyde
author-last: Ellis
author:  Clyde Ellis
author-note: "Clyde Ellis is a professor of history at Elon University."
vol: 14
year: 2012
book-reviewed: "Joel W. Martin and Mark A. Nicholas, eds. <em>Native 
Americans, Christianity, and the Reshaping of the American Religious 
Landscape</em>. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2010. xiii, 
325 pp.  ISBN 978-0-8078-7415-4."
---

This wide-ranging collection of essays on religious encounters between
Natives and non-Natives in eighteenth and early nineteenth-century North
America jettisons the usual tired tropes in favor of an extraordinary
range of responses and consequences. Disquieted by what they perceive as
a failure to truly appreciate the nuanced and complex nature of such
encounters, the authors stake a claim to a truly cross-cultural,
inter-disciplinary approach that reveals a deeply contested world in
which religiosity was constantly renegotiated and revised by Natives and
non-Natives, and by Christians and non-Christians alike. In his
excellent conclusion (with which readers ought to begin), Mark A.
Nicholas notes that these essays are bound by an interest in religious
encounter as a form of cultural capital that was expressed in an
astonishing variety of ways. "Our authors," writes Nicholas, "look at
the indigenization of Christian material objects and Christian texts;
the physical settings for encounter...; Natives in dialogue with
Christian precepts and practices; and Native Christians' emotions,
senses, and intellectual worlds" (276). Moreover, continues Nicholas,
while religious encounters in the early republic had an amazing array of
forms and an equally wide variety of meanings, scholars have been
reluctant or unwilling to fully examine how Native people shaped and
interpreted those encounters. While some readers will think that this
argument is pressed rather too aggressively in places (scholars have, in
fact, been increasingly aware of and interested in the very things
discussed in this book), Nicholas is certainly correct in reminding us
that "Scholars have to find the ways Native spiritual leaders sought to
create religious ideologies to salvage themselves, educate their own
people, and engage in white American religious forums. Native Americans
did think about religion on their own" (282).

The book is divided into four sections. Each problematizes the usual
list of assumptions about encounter, adaptation, and accommodation that
have attached themselves with unfortunate vigor to the hallowed but
ultimately unsatisfying notion of the "middle ground." As most of these
essays suggest, because we so rarely look deeply and reflectively at the
multivalent nature of the supposed middle ground, we tend to
overestimate its meaning and to understate its complexities. One of this
volume's strongest contributions, then, is an assault on the comfortable
lines of inquiry that ignore religion's role as an agent of colonialism,
or that stop short of asking how and with what consequences Native
people responded to Christianity's often disruptive but also galvanizing
presence in their communities. In part one, for example, "Negotiating
Conversion," Joanna Brooks, Daniel Mandell, and Joel Martin examine the
responses of three very different communities---Mohegan; a collection of
southern New England tribes; and Cherokees, respectively. Brooks's
commentary on Samson Occom is especially instructive. Without ignoring
the often corrosive effects of Christianity's aggressive demands for
spiritual and cultural conversion, she reminds us that Native churches
led by people like Occom "became places where Indian people could
connect and process the extreme pressures they shouldered as well as the
difficult feelings that accompanied them" (35). Mandell's survey of the
life and work of Frederick Baylies likewise confirms a complex pattern
of interaction and agency in which Native people clearly appreciated
Christianity's possibilities for positive change, while Martin's
intriguing essay on the Cherokee convert David Brown shows how Brown
adroitly used his newfound celebrity as a Native Christian to convert
whites into defenders of Cherokee sovereignty by appealing to their
sense of decency and compassion. In all, Brooks notes, these kinds of
stories reveal "Christianity in the indigenous communities as a
tumultuous, variegated, highly differentiated field of activity fraught
both with zones of soul-harming subjugation, coercion, and
indoctrination and with opportunities for vision, innovation,
imagination, and articulation." Thus, in addition to being carefully
constructed discussions of Native conversion, for example, these essays
also "bring us face to face with indigenous feelings about colonialism"
(24). This is an important revision of the middle ground approach in
that its emphasis on religion as an overt extension of colonialism puts
the sharp edges back into play.

In part two, "Practicing Religion," part three, "Circulating Texts," and
part four, "Creating Communities," we see a variety of narratives that
confirm and extend the ideas that come to the fore in part one. While
these three sections are valuable to the book's larger conversation, the
essays in part two are especially notable for their insights into the
varieties of lived experience. Part four's essays (Rachel Wheeler's
excellent piece on the Mahican prophet Hendrick Aupaumut, and David
Silverman's thoughtful examination of missionary work in the Brotherton
and Stockbridge communities) might have been easily folded into part
two's commentaries thus giving that section a really robust stance. The
weak link in the collection is part three, where the essays---which are
otherwise excellent---seem a bit out of place. Laura Stevens's piece on
Scottish missions and the eighteenth century British Empire, for
example, suggests a transatlantic frame that is sensible, but ultimately
undeveloped anywhere else in the collection. As a result it tends to
have limited utility for the larger conversation. Likewise, Steven J.
Hackel's and Hilary E. Wyss's comparative piece on California and New
England missions seems out of place.

The essays in part two are particularly useful. Douglas Winiarski, Emma
Anderson, and Tracy Neal Leavelle confront the diverse varieties of
lived experience as Native and non-Natives alike sought to come to an
understanding of what these encounters and changes meant. In a
fascinating and agile discussion of New England's Old Colony and its
"sprawling religious culture," for example, Winiarski finds Wampanoag
people who were "fully acquainted with Christianity yet anchored in an
ancient cosmology" reflected in kinship, mortuary practices, folk
religion, and the supernatural---things not unfamiliar to their white,
Christian neighbors. Leavelle's discussion of gender in New France
reveals similar patterns of agency, in this case the use of the rosary
as the focus of "creative cultural convergences" that "represented new
forms of gendered religious practice and increased female power." In
Leavelle's hands, these developments were not evidence of conversion as
whites understood the term so much as they were the signs of "the
translation of Christianity into a local idiom" (161). Leavelle's essay,
in which there are echoes of Kenneth Morrison's work on Montagnais
conversions, reminds us that context is everything.

By far the most powerful essay in this section---and in the entire
volume---is Emma Anderson's reassessment of Jean de Brébeuf's 1649 death
at the hands of the Haudenosaunee. Long celebrated as a classic case of
Christian martyrdom, Anderson's work entirely challenges the theological
and historical threads that defenders of the faith have created, and
instead examines the event through a three-way cross-cultural lens:
Brébeuf and his followers; his Haudenosaunee captors; and a group of
Wendats who forsook their conversions and allied themselves with the
Haudenosaunee. In a stunningly effective assessment of motive and
purpose, Anderson suggests that while Brebeuf's faith was no doubt *a*
factor in the larger story, it was not *the* factor; the decision to
kill him likely had nothing to do with "in odium fidei"*---*martyrdom
prompted by the hatred of the faith---and everything to do with
Haudenosaunee views about political power and influence. This is not
only a corrective to the long-held interpretations of the story; it
inverts the entire paradigm surrounding it, and suggests a much more
complex expression of Native agency. If readers have time for only
essay, make it this one.

This is an important, wide-ranging, and insightful collection of essays.
Readers interested in cross-cultural exchange, and in the history of
Christianity in early America will benefit from its ideas and findings.
