---
layout: article
title: "Review: The Accidental Slaveholder"
author-first: Daniel L.
author-last: Fountain
author: Daniel L. Fountain
author-note: "Daniel L. Fountain is an associate professor of history at 
Meredith College."
vol: 14
year: 2012
book-reviewed: "Mark Auslander. <em>The Accidental Slaveholder: 
Revisiting a Myth of Race and Finding an American Family</em>. Athens: 
The University of Georgia Press, 2011. 383 pp. ISBN 978-0-8203-4042-5."
---

American Methodists split into regional denominations following the 1844
General Conference of the Methodist Church held in New York City. The
event that precipitated the split was a resolution passed by antislavery
Methodists requesting Bishop James Osgood Andrew of Georgia to suspend
the activities of his office until he had remedied himself of his
association with slavery. Bishop Andrew was a slaveowner, having
inherited or acquired without purchase more than a dozen slaves from
family members, former parishioners, and, most notably, his wives. For
most Methodists in the South the resolution was a grave insult to the
man and the region and the final straw which necessitated the creation
of a separate, regional denomination. In particular, since the Bishop
had acquired his slaves through "no fault of his own," the resolution
dishonored an honorable man. It thereby demonstrated the radical and
unreasonable attitudes of northern Methodists concerning the role of
slavery within the church. In making this argument, southerners
particularly focused on the Bishop's ownership of Kitty, a young,
biracial woman, who he claimed had been willed to him by a former
parishioner with the instruction to allow her to either emigrate to
Liberia or remain his slave in as free a condition allowed by the laws
of Georgia. According to accounts given by Andrew, biographers friendly
to him, and his past and contemporary admirers, the bishop not only
lived up to the parishioner's request but treated Kitty as a family
member, so much so, that she preferred to remain a slave rather than
live free in Africa.

According to author Mark Auslander, for more than a century the story of
Kitty (more appropriately known as Catherine Boyd) has meant many things
to many Methodists, white southerners, and, most importantly, to the
residents of Oxford, Georgia, where the bishop and Kitty resided during
the time of the Methodist split. For these groups, this story has served
as proof of the bishop's personal honor, a defense of slavery as a
benevolent institution, an idealized model for race relations, and the
basis for an historic house museum in the cottage that the bishop had
built for Kitty to live in behind his home.

In contrast to the interpretations white southerners have given to the
history of Bishop Andrew and Kitty, the African American community of
Oxford has long maintained an alternative version of this story. Kitty
was the Bishop's forced mistress, many black residents assert, that he
shamefully housed nearby to facilitate his loathsome abuse of his
enslaved lover. Accordingly, the white community's warm embrace and
public promotion of their version of the story via the restoration of
"Kitty's Cottage" and erection of cemetery makers has stirred deep
emotions in the African American community. As Auslander argues, African
Americans are frustrated that whites are still attempting to defend
slavery, saddened that Kitty's victimization is denied, and angry that
their story has been ignored or silenced.

The disparity between the white and black interpretations of Bishop
Andrew and Kitty's relationship is the focus of Mark Auslander's
analysis in *The Accidental Slaveholder*. Auslander, a professor of
anthropology, uses an interdisciplinary approach to try to explain how
such competing myths can emerge and what their promulgation tells us
about the communities in which these mythical constructs exist. He
methodically analyzes published and recorded versions of the story to
determine how the existing narratives developed through time, while also
documenting the evolution of "Kitty's Cottage" as an historic site.
Additionally, Auslander traces the genealogy of the Boyd family into the
modern era, draws upon his extensive oral history interviews to
thoughtfully portray Oxford's African American community, and describes
how service-learning projects conducted by his students directly
benefited Oxford and his research. The resulting book functions like a
cross between Timothy Tyson's *Blood Done Sign My Name* (2004) and James
Loewen's *Lies Across America* (1999). As with Tyson, Auslander's book
is a deeply personal reflection about his direct experience with a
community's struggle over its racially charged past. Simultaneously, his
focus on public history sites and the mythological characteristics
informing the public's interpretation of them is strikingly similar to
Loewen's analysis of the often inaccurate or contorted representation of
the nation's past.

Ultimately, Auslander's work is an unusual but interesting local history
featuring a central story that has regional importance. Its greatest
contribution is its clear portrayal of the lingering debates over
slavery, the Civil War, and the meaning of freedom that regularly occur
at the local level where community and family identity are quite
literally a very public and personal matter. Academic and general
readers who are interested in the history of slavery, southern religious
history, anthropology, genealogy, and public or local history will
likely find this book to be useful and interesting reading.
