---
layout: article
title: "Religious Diversity and the Coming of Christianity in the 
Prerevolutionary South"
author-first: Rebecca Anne
author-last: Goetz
author:  Rebecca Anne Goetz
author-note: "Rebecca Anne Goetz is an assistant professor of History at 
Rice University."
vol: 14
year: 2012
---

As I was beginning research on what became my first book more than a
decade ago, people repeatedly told me to give the project up. Religion
and race in the seventeenth-century Chesapeake? Certainly race mattered,
of course it did, there in that crucible of tobacco and slavery. But
religion? There were no sources for religion in seventeenth-century
Virginia! For my critics, religion only mattered in Virginia---and
indeed in the rest of the South---for the emergence of the evangelical
Bible Belt. This dominant narrative obscured the religious worlds of
colonial southerners---the many Christianities, African religions,
Islam, Judaism, and the beliefs of native Southerners.[^1] Older
assumptions festered: the South's white colonists valued profits over
prayers and enslaved people lived in a world devoid of the sacred,
victims of a "spiritual Holocaust."[^2]

The last ten to fifteen years have seen a sea change in our
understanding of colonial religiosity in general and in the early South
in particular. I have observed the changes through my own work; where I
was once pressed to defend the study of religion in Virginia, I am now
asked detailed questions about religious minorities and African American
syncretic Christianity. When the editors of the *Journal of Southern
Religion* asked me to put together a forum on religion in the early
South, I saw an opportunity to show how delightfully complex our
awareness of the religiosity of the early South has become. The colonial
South was a deeply and variously religious place, and the advent of the
Bible Belt was a much longer, more complicated process than earlier work
had indicated. Most critically, scholars have absorbed the existence of
many colonial Christianities and the place of both the Atlantic World
and the continental interior in circulating ideas and beliefs. They have
also begun to take the spiritual lives of non-whites seriously. The
forum essays by Travis Glasson, Jewel Spangler, Maura Farrelly, Jason
Young, and Tracy Leavelle, take into account these historiographical and
methodological developments and offer thought-provoking suggestions
about where future research might take us.

The early South we are in the process of recovering was deeply diverse:
it was multireligious, multiethnic, and multiracial. As Philip Morgan
recently wrote about colonial Virginia, "[u]northodoxy, no matter what
the perspective, was widespread."[^3] Morgan's observations on Virginia
could be usefully applied to the rest of the colonial South. Christian
heterodoxy and general religious diversity were persistent and
ubiquitous features of the colonial South. A list of the many
Christianities present in the region would be longer than my arm: there
were Roman Catholics, members of the Church of England (in all their
glorious variety), Huguenots, German Pietists, Moravians, Quakers, and
in the eighteenth century, small groups of Baptists and Presbyterians as
well. And this list is not exhaustive, of course. The most important
point is that European Christians, their Indian and African converts,
and various non-Christians lived cheek-by-jowl with one another. While
this did occasion episodes of sectarian violence (often between
Protestants of various stripes and Roman Catholics), it also forced a
practical toleration. In Virginia, Quakers---though mistrusted and
sometimes imprisoned---never found themselves in danger of being
executed as their brethren were in Massachusetts. In Virginia, too,
wealthy landowning Catholic families such as the Brents were not only
tolerated but even protected.[^4] Some southern colonies even wrote
toleration of a sort into their founding documents. The Fundamental
Constitutions of Carolina mandated religious toleration "that civil
peace may be maintained amidst diversity of opinions."[^5] Though the
Carolina document was never much respected among its constituents, other
southern colonies also experimented with toleration. Georgia, for
example, initially did not have an established church and extended
religious toleration to all except Roman Catholics. Recognizing the
religious diversity of the colonial South, then, should have the effect
of encouraging scholars to think anew not only about the sources of
religious violence in the early South but also about the origins and
development of religious toleration.[^6]

One of the happy effects of acknowledging religious diversity and of
decentering the growth of evangelicalism has been to refocus attention
on the Church of England. Most historians generally considered
Anglicanism too weak (even where established), too peppered with
scandalously unprincipled clergy, and too irrelevant to the daily lives
of ordinary colonists to have had a meaningful impact. In this
narrative, the Church of England remained a quaint creature of the
elite, waiting to be challenged and overcome by evangelicalism. Though
other, less pejorative histories of Anglicanism have long emanated from
within the Church of England, counternarratives of a dynamic and
adaptive Anglican church have only recently come to the fore.[^7] Travis
Glasson's essay "Protestantism in the Early South" establishes the
importance of Anglicanism in the South in the context of a multiracial,
multireligious society, crediting Atlantic history with reviving the
fortunes of Anglican historiography. As Glasson points out, "Atlantic
history has served as an antidote to the excessive exceptionalism to
which some Southern religious history has been prone." Glasson also
notes that Anglicanism appealed to a much wider group of people than had
been previously assumed. The Church of England adjusted to a variety of
conditions and bound Anglicans living around the Atlantic together. It
was also a source of rich tradition and valued spirituality---especially
for displaced Britons. Glasson's own fine book specifically addresses
Atlantic Anglicanism in the context of missionary activity in the
Caribbean and mainland North America. The very fluidity and adaptability
of the Church of England transformed a missionary movement designed to
mitigate the worst effects of slavery into a fully formed proslavery
Christianity. Yet as Glasson also notes, the Church of England was
crucial to the development of black Protestantism.[^8] In this new
history of the Church of England, Atlantic currents and careful
attention to nonwhite interaction with Anglicanism will help scholars
answer new questions about African and Indian interactions with
Christianity in a context where it has been sorely overlooked.

As colonial Anglicanism has emerged from the shadows, so have the
South's dissenting Protestants. Dissenters were, of course,
everywhere---even in colonies with established churches. Their
communities should be viewed not in isolation but as part of a broader
Atlantic context of migration, exchange, and conflict. The experiences
of individual dissenters moving around an Atlantic world full of
religious ferment show how varied dissenters were and how their own
beliefs changed over the course of their lifetimes. The
seventeenth-century Anglican minister Patrick Copeland, for example,
began his career by evangelizing Bengalis on behalf of the East India
Company. He later became a member of the Virginia Company of London,
advising the Company on matters related to Indian conversion. He
eventually emigrated to Bermuda, where he abandoned the Church of
England in favor of radical congregationalism. He was briefly imprisoned
on Bermuda before joining a colony on the island of Eleuthera (Greek for
"freedom") that welcomed all Protestant dissenters. Copeland's
experiences show how dissenters moved around the English imperium, and
also illustrate how their religious liberties were usually limited to
some degree by the state.[^9] Protestant dissent moved and circulated
throughout the Atlantic world, shaping nascent religious cultures and
challenging---by their very existence---mainstream Protestantism.

Black Protestant dissenters also moved around the Atlantic world. In the
eighteenth century, the tale of Rebecca Protten similarly demonstrates
the movement of dissenters in the Atlantic world, this time through the
Moravian Church. Rebecca was born into slavery on the island of St.
Thomas. She converted to Christianity through the efforts of a Moravian
missionary, gained her freedom, and became a missionary in her own
right, living first in the Caribbean, then in Germany. Her last voyage
as a missionary was to the Danish slave-trading factory of Christianborg
on the Gold Coast, where she died in 1781. Protten's story suggests the
complicated relationship among Moravians, race, and the institution of
slavery.[^10] Studying Protestant dissenters is another window into the
spiritual lives of nonwhite southerners. Moravians and Quakers embraced
racial equality in interesting ways; rather than treating their
radicalism on race (and gender for that matter) as odd outliers,
scholars should integrate them into the broader narrative of southern
religion.

Puritans---that hotter sort of Protestant---were ubiquitous in the
seventeenth century. Far from being confined to New England, puritans
lived in Bermuda, the Caribbean, and in the South. The presence of
puritans in early Virginia drew Governor William Berkeley's ire; he
drove them out as soon as he was able to and his conflict with these
dissenting Protestants exposed fault lines in colonial southern society.
Dissenters were sometimes seen, as Berkeley saw them, as traitors and as
dangers to the stability of colonial administration. As late as the
1670s, Berkeley directed sarcastic commentary toward Massachusetts Bay
puritans, whom he referred to as the "Brethren," "for they as the Popes
ever did doe love an usurper better than a lawful prince."[^11]
Berkeley's feud with puritans and his support for the established Church
of England reinforce to some degree the trope of established elites in
conflict with challenging dissenters. Recent scholarship strongly
suggests, though, that thinking in terms of conflict between an orthodox
establishment and upstart dissenters might not be useful for the
eighteenth century. Jewel Spangler argues in her essay "Protestant
Dissenters in the Early South" that some dissenting traditions such as
Presbyterians and Baptists, while offering true alternatives to the
Church of England, also worked within an established social order. Her
conclusions suggest that dissenters were not as countercultural as those
they supposedly challenged---including Berkeley---wanted to believe.

Spangler also argues in her essay here and in her other well-received
work that dissenter congregations were "supportive of planter power,
social hierarchies, and slavery."[^12] Spangler's work is also part of a
renaissance in new studies of non-Anglican Protestantism in the late
colonial and early national periods that has upended previously
cherished truths about the rise of evangelicalism and proslavery
Christianity. New work by Randolph Scully and Charles Irons, for
example, highlights the complicated relationship between these emergent
congregations and African Americans, and both paint a complex picture of
the relationship between Protestant dissent and proslavery
Christianity.[^13] Included among southern dissenters were also smaller
groups, Moravians, Quakers, and Huguenots for example. As Spangler also
notes, these people did not fit neatly into old standard narratives
about the development of evangelicalism. With that narrative
sufficiently complicated, Spangler suggests that scholars can renew
their interest in groups that faded in the nineteenth century, taking
them and their importance for the religiosity of the colonial South
seriously on their own terms. Their presence and persistence in the
colonial period again highlight the importance of ideas of religious
toleration and religious liberty.

Though our understanding of Protestantism and its dissenters has changed
radically in the last decade, Protestantism maintains its hold on our
imaginations. It is the form of Christianity that dominates the
narrative of religious history in the early South. But until the early
eighteenth century, Protestants in any guise were the minority Christian
group in the South, heavily outnumbered by Roman Catholics.[^14] The
Spanish had missions in Florida (and for a brief period, in the
Chesapeake), and the French presence in the lower Mississippi Valley
brought Catholicism farther west. If we take seriously Juliana Barr's
call to define the South as a "Sunbelt" stretching from the Atlantic
coast into the Southwest to the Pacific Ocean, Catholicism's dominance
in the colonial South becomes even more obvious.[^15] Spanish missions
in Texas, New Mexico, and California worked hard to convert native
people to Catholicism, and by the early eighteenth century, their
efforts had borne fruit. From Florida to Santa Fe, French, Spanish, and
native Catholics connected across trade routes that reached into the
desert Southwest and into the heart of the continent. Far from being a
land of (mostly) Anglophone Protestants of various stripes, when seen
from the Caribbean, from Florida, from the French trade up and down the
Mississippi River, or from Mexico City, the South was a Roman Catholic
space.

The English (Protestant) challenge to the Catholic South came not with
the establishment of Jamestown (though the Virginia colonists spent much
of the seventeenth century living in fear of Spanish raids), but with
the establishment of Carolina and the growth of a vigorous trade in
enslaved Indians. Between 1702 and 1705, English slave traders and their
Indian allies repeatedly raided the missions of Spanish Florida,
destroying many towns and enslaving and killing native people. Those who
were not killed or enslaved fled to French territory, hoping for
protection there. During one particularly devastating raid in 1704, a
party of English and Ochese raiders burned towns and tortured captives,
and in a fit of anti-Catholic ire, the invaders burned and looted a
mission church.[^16] English ascendancy in Carolina not only threatened
the Catholic South but also doomed the well-connected chain of missions
that stretched from the Florida peninsula to the Gulf Coast South. As
Jon Sensbach has pointed out, the early eighteenth-century attacks on
the Florida missions represented a turning point in the history of the
South, one that historians who have been shaped by the narrative of
Protestant domination have missed.[^17] This Catholic South needs to be
understood on its own terms, and its dominance needs to be integrated
into our understanding of southern religiosity.

As Maura Farrelly notes in her essay "Catholicism and the Early South,"
Catholicism had an "English accent" in Maryland, the only English colony
formed deliberately to shelter Catholics. English Protestants quickly
outnumbered English Catholics in the little colony (puritans in the
settlement attempted to take over the colony on behalf of Parliament in
1645--1646). After the Glorious Revolution, Farrelly observes that
though Catholics labored under sometimes severe legal disabilities
during the eighteenth century, they retained a commitment to toleration
and religious liberty that spurred their enthusiastic participation in
the American Revolution. Farrelly also argues that Maryland's English
Catholics were crucial to the legal institutionalization of race-based
slavery in the Chesapeake, and that slavery "played a role in the
creation of a distinctly 'American' form of Roman Catholic identity."

Maryland's Catholics might not have wrestled with questions of
conscience regarding race and slavery, but as Farrelly points out,
French and Spanish Catholics, especially the regular clergy, certainly
did. The New Orleans Ursuline convent housed French, Cuban, and
American-born women but championed equal access to the sacraments for
all people.[^18] Equally important were the large numbers of African
Catholics in the South. Just as Travis Glasson argues that understanding
enslaved Anglicans is an important project, so is understanding enslaved
Catholics. Jason Young's essay "African Religions in the Early South"
makes a powerful case for carefully considering African Catholicism in
the context of a diverse southern religiosity. When Kongolese
Catholicism entered the South with enslaved people, it was a Catholicism
that had been understood, adopted, and adapted by several generations
and had been worked into the fabric of West African life. British
missionaries and clergymen observed with interest and some puzzlement
the presence of this strong Afro-Catholicism among enslaved people in
Carolina; some of these Kongolese Catholics requested conversion into
the Church of England. Kongolese Catholics' devotion to the Virgin Mary
might have inspired the slave rebellion in Stono, South Carolina, in
1739.[^19] Young rightly suggests that West African Catholicism, like
Protestantism and Islam, contributed to the emergence of African
American religion later in the eighteenth century. But Afro-Catholicism
is also important in its own right. The South was sprinkled with black
Catholic converts as well, especially in Spanish Florida. These men and
women chose Catholicism in the New World rather than in the Old.[^20]
Roman Catholicism in the broad South was diverse: it was multiethnic,
multiracial, and multilingual. It appealed to people from Europe,
Africa, and the Americas, and it formed the backbone of southern
religiosity for the better part of three centuries.

Other Old World monotheisms made their way to the American South as
well. Islam came to the North American continent via the South, and it
accompanied Christianity. The history of Islam in the New World began as
soon as Old World voyagers began exploring the land. In the sixteenth
century, Muslims came mostly from North Africa via trade in slaves
around the Mediterranean. Estebanico, a North African slave on Panfilo
de Narvaez's expedition, was one of only four survivors of the venture
and spent the years between 1527 and 1536 walking from the west coast of
Florida to the Pacific coast of Mexico. Estebanico was from the town of
Azamor in Morocco, and was most likely born into a Muslim family. After
his enslavement, probably by Portuguese invaders/traders, Estebanico's
captors likely forced him to convert to Christianity and gave him a new
name---after St. Stephen. Spain forbade the immigration of Muslims,
Jews, and *conversos* to the New World, so Estebanico's master must have
accepted his Christianity, at least nominally. Estebanico had a gift for
languages and an adaptability that eluded some of his Spanish
counterparts; he was confident in his relationship with native peoples
he met along the way.[^21] Another Muslim, named Chinano and enslaved in
Cartagena, found his way home to the Levant via one of Francis Drake's
piratical attacks and a (possibly spurious) conversion to Christianity
in London.[^22] Even in the seventeenth century, Turks found themselves
in North America after circuitous journeys. In the 1670s, three Turkish
captives were living in Virginia, and Governor Berkeley promised them
freedom if they converted to Christianity. Two of the men took the
governor up on his offer, and Lady Berkeley stood as godmother to the
new converts. The third man did not convert, but Berkeley freed him
anyway.[^23]

The stories of Estebanico, Chinano, and the three Turkish captives hint
at the possibility of many microhistories of Muslims in the early South
awaiting discovery in the archives. Yet most of what we know about Islam
is anecdotal or comes from reconstructing the deep context of the
African origins of enslaved people. As Michael Gomez has noted, Islam
was fairly common in portions of Senegambia and the interior of the Gold
Coast and the Bight of Benin---all places from which British planters
preferred to import enslaved people. Gomez estimates the numbers of West
African Muslims coming into the colonial South in the thousands---making
African Muslims a significant presence.[^24] Jason Young notes that
enslaved African Muslims were present in French Louisiana, Spanish
Florida, and the British South, and that African Muslims helped shape
African American society and identity. Atlantic history has been crucial
to tracing the existence and legacies of African Muslims as well.
Young's previous work argues for the importance of "African Atlantic
religion" in defining the importance of African Christianities and
African Islam to the formation of African American identity.[^25] Yet
despite the scholarly certainty that the presence of Muslims is
important to understanding the religiosity of the early South, there are
still more questions than answers. The history of the early South's
Muslims unfortunately remains a niche topic that has resisted
integration into broader narratives about the diversity of southern
religiosity. In this way older assumptions about the principal
importance of European Christianities still hobble efforts to see a more
diverse South.

The questions are similar for the history of Judaism in the early South.
We know that Jews came in small numbers to mainland North America, yet
their stories are also not integrated into the larger narrative of
southern religiosity. And here too the Atlantic paradigm is critical to
understanding how Judaism came to the South and how Jewish people
circulated throughout the Anglophone and Lusophone worlds. Jewish people
came to the South individually or in small groups. In Maryland, Jacob
Lumbrozo, identified as "the Jew doctor," was prosecuted "for uttering
words of blesphemy agst [against] Our Blessed Sauiour Jesus Christ" in
1658. Lumbrozo demurred, telling the Provincial Court that he had
answered particular questions "[b]ut sayd not any thing scoffingly or in
derogaon [derogation] of him, Christians acknowledge for their
Messias."[^26] Lumbrozo was probably a Sephardic refugee who left Brazil
after the conquest of Dutch Recife by the Portuguese in 1654. Though it
is not clear why Lumbrozo chose to settle in Maryland over New
Netherland, Amsterdam, or Curaçao, he evidently made an impression on
Marylanders. Jews had first come to the New World (officially and
openly) via the Netherlands to Dutch Brazil, where they were not only
tolerated but also permitted to worship freely. Jewish people trickled
into Anglophone North America over the seventeenth and eighteenth
centuries under similar circumstances to those of Lumbrozo: they sought
places of safety and toleration where they might peacefully settle.[^27]
Many of these people settled in New York or Newport, from which they
were involved in the Atlantic trading activities that bound the mainland
colonies with the Caribbean.

Starting in the late seventeenth century, other groups of Sephardic and
Ashkenazic Jews began to make their way specifically to the Gulf Coast
South. Jewish settlers were tolerated (though not encouraged) by the
Fundamental Constitutions of Carolina, which granted freedom of religion
to "Jews, Heathens, and other Dissenters from the purity of the
Christian Religion" (though no Roman Catholics were allowed). Evidence
suggests that by the 1690s at least a few Jewish families from Barbados
were living in Charleston. In 1733 a group of Jewish settlers departed
London for Georgia, and after a harrowing six-month voyage and some
controversy on their arrival, they were allowed to stay in
Savannah.[^28] Judaism in the colonial South is often overlooked because
of small numbers, but it must be a part of the narrative of southern
religiosity.

Protestantism, Roman Catholicism, African religions, Islam, and Judaism
were all newcomers on a continent with its own religious traditions. The
world of Native American religiosity has suffered the same neglect and
erroneous assumption as African American religion: that the coming of
Christianity in all its forms was so destructive that native people (and
their religious beliefs) were overrun, assimilated, and lost. This trope
of the "vanishing Indian," notes Tracy N. Leavelle in his essay "Native
American Religions in the Early American South," no longer controls
historical inquiry into the Indian past, but Native American religions
do remain understudied. Some of our current knowledge comes from
archaeological studies of Mississippian chiefdoms and tracing the
remnants of precontact Mississippian beliefs into the era of
contact.[^29] Early English settlers as well as later French settlers in
the Gulf Coast South observed native people performing the Green Corn
Ceremony, and French traders witnessed the remnants of the Mississippian
chiefdoms among the Natchez in the late seventeenth and early eighteenth
centuries. Yet much of the literature wrestles with the long encounter
between native people and Christianity, gauging the destructiveness of
the Franciscan missions in Florida, of the Jesuits in the Mississippi
Valley, or of the English with their Society for the Propagation of the
Gospel in Foreign Parts. Leavelle calls for not only renewed scholarship
into native religion, but also for scholarship that while not
overlooking or excusing the destructiveness of European colonialism also
seeks to understand the "creative transformations of people engaged in a
struggle for freedom and dignity." Leavelle also notes that the
religious studies scholar Joel Martin argued in 1997 that only 2% of
human history in the South involves contact among native people,
Europeans, and Africans. Much of that missing 98% remains unknown, which
means the longue durée of southern religious history has been flattened
withits dynamism and diversity excluded from the narrative.

Despite the paucity of sources, this neglect is probably due in part to
the hold explanations for the emergence of the Bible Belt retain on
scholarly approaches to southern religious history. As this
historiography has changed to make room for a muscular and adaptive
Church of England, for dissenters who matter in their own right, for
widespread, numerically superior Roman Catholicism, and even for new
treatments of Islam in the early South, I would like to suggest one more
avenue for upending the dominant narrative. Viewed through the lens of
Native American history, much of the emphasis on the history of
Christianity in the South is misleading. Christianity in all its forms
was a minority religion in the colonial South. Christians of all
types---established Protestant, Catholic, and dissenter---were
outnumbered by native people with their own religious traditions and by
the rich and varied religious traditions, including Islam, brought by
enslaved people from Africa. If we take Philip Morgan's observation
about the unremarkable heterodoxy of the early South to its logical
conclusion, what we see is a South where pockets of Christianity were
surrounded by vast seas of other, non-European religions. Indians and
Africans interacted with Christianity---sometimes on their terms,
sometimes under duress, but always adapting it to suit their needs and
desires in a changing world. Perhaps this colonial South, where Indian
and African religions hold the most explanatory power and where they
dominate the narrative, will be the intriguing place that drives
scholarship forward.

[^1]: The author wishes to thank Luke Harlow, Mike Pasquier, Randal
    Hall, and Salman Hussain for their comments on an early draft of
    this essay. For a succinct explanation of how the historiography
    developed this way, see Jon F.Sensbach, "Religion and the Early
    South in an Age of Atlantic Empire," *Journal of Southern History*
    73 (August 2007): 631--642.

[^2]: Jon Butler, *Awash in a Sea of Faith: Christianizing the American
    People* (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1990), 157.

[^3]: Philip D. Morgan, "Religious Diversity in Colonial Virginia: Red,
    Black, and White," in *From Jamestown to Jefferson: The Evolution of
    Religious Freedom in Virginia,*ed. Paul Rasor and Richard E.
    Bond(Charlottesville: University of Virginia Press, 2011), 75.

[^4]: Bruce E. Steiner, "The Catholic Brents of Colonial Virginia: An
    Instance of Practical Toleration," *Virginia Magazine of History and
    Biography* 70 (1962): 387--409.

[^5]: <http://avalon.law.yale.edu/17th_century/nc05.asp>

[^6]: There is some excellent new work on toleration. For the early
    Republic see Chris Beneke, *Beyond Toleration: The Religious Origins
    of American Pluralism* (New York and Oxford: Oxford University
    Press, 2006); for the colonial period see Beneke and Christopher S.
    Grenda, ed., *The First Prejudice: Religious Tolerance and
    Intolerance in Early America* (Philadelphia: University of
    Pennsylvania Press, 2010). Evan Haefeli wrestles with Dutch
    contributions to American ideas of religious liberty; see Haefeli,
    *New Netherland and the Dutch Origins of American Religious Liberty*
    (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2012). I am also
    intrigued by the possibility of an Atlantic history of toleration.
    See Stuart Schwartz, *All Can Be Saved: Religious Tolerance and
    Salvation in the Iberian Atlantic World* (New Haven: Yale University
    Press, 2008).

[^7]: ,For example, see John Frederick Woolverton, *Colonial Anglicanism
    in North America* (Detroit, MI: Wayne State University Press, 1986),
    and Edward Bond's chronically underappreciated *Damned Souls in a
    Tobacco Colony: Religion in Seventeenth-Century Virginia* (Macon,
    GA: Mercer University Press, 2000).

[^8]: Travis Glasson, *Mastering Christianity: Missionary Anglicanism
    and Slavery in the Atlantic Worl*d (New York and Oxford: Oxford
    University Press, 2012).

[^9]: On Patrick Copeland, see Edward D. Neill, *Memoir of Reverend
    Patrick Copeland: Rector Elect of the First Projected College in the
    United States: A Chapter in the English Colonization of America*
    (New York: Charles Scribner & Co, 1871); Shona Vance, "A Man for all
    Regions: Patrick Copland and Education in the Stuart World," in
    *Shaping the Stuart World 1603--1714: The Atlantic connection*, ed.
    Allan I. MacInnes and Arthur H. Williamson (Leiden: Brill, 2006),
    79--116; Alison Games, *Web of Empire: English Cosmopolitans in an
    Age of Expansion, 1560--1660* (Oxford and New York: Oxford
    University Press, 2008), 219--254.

[^10]: Jon F. Sensbach, *Rebecca's Revival: Creating Black Christianity
    in the Atlantic World* (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press,
    2005). For another biographical account of West African Moravianism,
    see Ray A. Kea, "From Catholicism to Moravian Pietism: The World of
    Marotta Magdalena, a Woman of Popo and St. Thomas," in *The Creation
    of the British Atlantic World*, ed. Elizabeth Mancke and Carole
    Shammas (Baltimore and London: The Johns Hopkins University Press,
    2005), 115--136.

[^11]: Governor William Berkeley to Richard Nicholls, 20 May 1666, in
    *The Papers of William Berkely, 1605--1677*, ed. Warren M. Billings
    (Richmond, VA: The Library of Virginia, 2007), 279--280. Berkeley's
    contempt for "the Brethren" was probably common among Virginia
    elites after the Restoration.

[^12]: Jewel L. Spangler, *Virginians Reborn: Anglican Establishment,
    Evangelical Dissent, and the Rise of the Baptists in the Late
    Eighteenth Century* (Charlottesville: University of Virginia Press,
    2008).

[^13]: Randolph Ferguson Scully, *Religion and the Making of Nat
    Turner's Virginia: Baptist Community and Conflict, 1740--1840*
    (Charlottesville: University of Virginia Press, 2008); Charles F.
    Irons, *The Origins of Proslavery Christianity: White and Black
    Evangelicals in Colonial and Antebellum Virginia* (Chapel Hill and
    London: University of North Carolina Press, 2008).

[^14]: Sensbach, "Religion and the Early South in an Age of Atlantic
    Empire," 632.

[^15]: Juliana Barr, "How do you get from Jamestown to Santa Fe? A
    Colonial Sun Belt," *Journal of Southern History* 73 (August 2007):
    553--566.

[^16]: Alan Gallay, *Indian Slave Trade: The Rise of the English Empire
    in the American South, 1670--1717* (New Haven: Yale University
    Press, 2002); Joseph M. Hall, Jr., *Zamumo's Gifts: Indian-European
    Exchange in the Colonial Southeast* (Philadelphia: University of
    Pennsylvania Press, 2009), 104--109.

[^17]: Sensbach, "Religion and the Early South in an Age of Atlantic
    Empire," 632--633.

[^18]: Emily Clark, *Masterless Mistresses: The New Orleans Ursulines
    and the Development of a New World Society, 1727--1834* (Chapel
    Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2007).

[^19]: Mark M. Smith, "Remembering Mary, Shaping Revolt: Reconsidering
    the Stono Rebellion," *Journal of Southern History* 67 (August
    2001), 513--534.

[^20]: See Jane Landers, *Black Society in Spanish Florida* (Urbana and
    Chicago: University of Illinois Press, 1999), 116--123.

[^21]: On Estebanico as a Muslim, see Andres Resendez, *A Land so
    Strange: The Epic Journey of Cabeza de Vaca* (NY: Basic Books,
    2007), 55--56.

[^22]: David Beers Quinn, "Turks, Moors, and Others in Drake's West
    Indian Voyage," *Itinerario* 14 (1982): 97--104.

[^23]: Reverend John Clayton (Præbendary of St Michans), *The Defense of
    a Sermon, Preach'd upon the Receiving into the Communion of the
    Church of England, the Honourable Sir Terence Mac-Mahon Baronet and
    Christopher Dunn: Converts from the Church of Rome* (Dublin, 1701),
    preface, n.p.

[^24]: Michael A. Gomez, *Exchanging our Country Marks: The
    Transformation of African Identities in the Colonial and Antebellum
    South* (Chapel Hill and London: University of North Carolina Press,
    1998), 60--61. See also Sylviane A. Diouf, *Servants of Allah:
    African Muslims Enslaved in the Americas* (New York: New York
    University Press, 1998); and Gomez, *Black Crescent: The Experience
    and Legacy of African Muslims in the Americas* (Cambridge: Cambridge
    University Press, 2005).

[^25]: Jason R. Young, *Rituals of Resistance: African Atlantic Religion
    in Kongo and the Lowcountry South in the Era of Slavery* (Baton
    Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 2007).

[^26]: Attorney General vs. Lumbrozo, 23 February 1658/59, in *The
    Archives of Maryland: Proceedings of the Provincial Court of
    Maryland, 1658--1662*, ed. Bernard Christian Steiner (Baltimore:
    Maryland Historical Society, 1922), 203.

[^27]: On the Sephardic diaspora in Dutch Brazil and in the Atlantic
    World, see the excellent essays in Richard L. Kagan and Philip D.
    Morgan, eds., *Atlantic Diasporas: Jews, Converso, and Crypto-Jews
    in the Age of Mercantilism, 1500--1800* (Baltimore: The Johns
    Hopkins University Press, 2009).

[^28]: On Jewish settlers in Charleston and Savannah, see William
    Pencak, *Jews and Gentiles in Early America, 1654--1800* (Ann Arbor:
    The University of Michigan Press, 2005), 117--141. For an
    encyclopedic overview of Jews in the Americas, see Jacob R. Marcus,
    *The Colonial American Jew, 1492--1776* III vol. (Detroit: Wayne
    State University Press, 1970).

[^29]: See for example Timothy R. Pauketat, *Cahokia: Ancient America's
    Great City on the Mississippi* (New York: Viking, 2009).
