---
layout: article
title: "Review: The Color of Christ"
author-first: Jennifer
author-last: Graber
author: Jennifer Graber
author-note: "Jennifer Graber is an associate professor of religious studies at the University of Texas at Austin."
vol: 14
year: 2012
book-reviewed: "Edward J. Blum and Paul Harvey. <em>The Color of Christ: The Son of God and
the Saga of Race in America</em>. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina
Press, 2012. 281 pp. ISBN 978-0-8078-3572-2."
---

*The Color of Christ* opens with a chilling story. In 1963, white
supremacists infamously bombed the historically black Sixteenth Street
Baptist church in Birmingham, Alabama, killing four African-American
girls. Along with the human destruction, the bomb shattered a stained
glass window that featured a white-skinned Jesus. Outraged citizens
responded, including Welsh schoolchildren who collected money for new
windows. But a question hung in the air: what color should Jesus be?

Edward J. Blum and Paul Harvey evoke this story of shattered lives and
shattered images of Jesus to introduce their claim that representations
of Jesus have "played a leading role in the saga of race in America"
(5). To support their argument, the authors establish an ambitious set
of inquiries. They look at the physical forms, placements, and
refashionings of Jesus images throughout American history. They focus
not only on the most popular and widely disseminated images, but also on
minority voices that have offered striking alternative visions and
responses.

The authors then make a set of claims about the intertwined development
of Jesus images and race in America. Their thesis unfolds through a
narrative history. Blum and Harvey argue that white Jesus images came to
power and prominence in the nineteenth century and that these images'
ubiquity demanded that everyone contend with them. The prominence of
these images, however, did not imply their stability. The authors
contend that the images shifted as definitions of whiteness changed and
as marginalized communities developed new rhetorical tools of protest
against an increasingly racist status quo.

Blum and Harvey lay out their claims in historically organized chapters
that begin in the religiously and racially diverse setting of colonial
America. They note that some believers were occupied with iconoclasm,
while those interested in Jesus images were drawn to red (i.e., bloody)
ones rather than white ones. Things changed, however, in the early
republic and antebellum periods as concerns about citizenship and racial
categorization came to the fore. In this setting, the white Jesus
emerged as a "cultural icon of white power" (78). Even so, the authors
pay close attention to voices offering alternative visions. Blum and
Harvey carry their investigation of the ascendant white Jesus through
the Civil War and age of American imperialism, arguing that images of
Jesus took on a Nordic character as definitions of whiteness narrowed.
Bringing the narrative fully into the twentieth century, the authors
explore the ways that "race and physical identity had become crucial
markers of Christ's spirit" among citizens ranging from Hollywood
producers to YMCA leaders to early civil rights advocates (202). They
conclude with reflections on Jesus images in the digital age, a period
in which many Americans acknowledge that the historical Jesus was
probably not white but nevertheless continue to consume from a global
marketplace of white Jesus images.

This is an ambitious book and it does many things well. Without saying
so, the authors place themselves in a stream of scholarship that
explores how contact and encounter have fuelled religious creativity
throughout American history. The book includes encounters between
racially and religiously different people, as well as these peoples'
encounters with racialized Jesus images. These meetings generate new
formulations about religion and race generally, and Jesus and whiteness
specifically. The book's unyielding emphasis on encounter makes it stand
out in a field where such contacts typically occupy the chapters on the
colonial era and the decades after 1965. Contact tends to drop out in
the big middle sections of narratives that emphasize nineteenth-century
evangelical consensus.

Even as they keep a variety of voices and contacts in their field of
vision, the authors rely on a fairly standard narrative structure:
colonial era diversity, nineteenth-century standardization, leading to
the radical reformulations of that standard in the second half of the
twentieth century. To be sure, the authors emphasize the instability of
the white Jesus images that emerged so powerfully in the early republic.
Their chapter on the Civil War reminds readers that imagining a white
Jesus did not bring agreement, even among white Protestants. Even so,
the narrative follows a pattern we see in studies of American
evangelicalism as well as scholarship on the construction of racial
categories. In both literatures, big developments in the early
nineteenth-century drive the story. The authors' narrative choices align
with the literatures on evangelicalism and whiteness, helping them
account for the ascendency of a white spiritual mediator in a nation
increasingly divided over the enslavement of American Americans.

This periodization focused on evangelicalism and whiteness is less
effective, however, as the authors bring American Indian responses to
Jesus imagery into the narrative. To be sure, Blum and Harvey have
clearly immersed themselves in the secondary literature on Native
American Christianity. The result is a work that highlights Indian
voices more effectively than almost any synthesizing work in the field.
One need only think the resounding absence of native voices in Stephen
Prothero's *American Jesus: How the Son of God became a National Icon*
(2004) and Richard Wightman Fox's familiar constraint of Indian peoples
to chapters on the colonial era on his *Jesus in America: Personal
Savior, Cultural Hero, National Obsession* (2005)*.* *The Color of
Christ* is very different and most welcome.

However, including these voices does not mean that they are easily
incorporated into a narrative structured around developments in the
nation's black-white racial divide. Further, it seems to me that
American Indian encounters with Jesus---including many of the stories in
this book---center on questions about Jesus' spiritual power and
communal status as opposed to his racial particularity. For instance,
did Indians in the early republic reject the "white Jesus" (89) because
he was white, as the authors suggest, or because they could not imagine
that a being killed by his own followers had adequate power? When
Nicholas Black Elk recalled a vision with a figure who was painted red,
but was neither a white man nor an Indian, was that a "Jesus figure of
racial ambiguity" (193) or a spirit being ritually prepared for war? I
do not think we can be sure. I worry, therefore, that some of Blum and
Harvey's conclusions force Indian responses into the story of racial
definition and categorization that drives their book.

I am also convinced that Blum and Harvey can hardly be faulted for these
possible missteps. Unlike our scholarly literature on African-American
Christianity, we simply do not have many detailed studies that show us
how everyday American Indians have practiced Christianity generally and
engaged white Jesus images specifically. Our best studies of native
Christianity focus on the colonial era, before the white Jesus burst
onto the scene. Even though many American Indians established various
relationships with Christian churches in the nineteenth and twentieth
centuries, the scholarship on them is limited. The literature, instead,
inordinately focuses on more colorful stories, such as ghost dancers and
peyote practitioners. The difficulty of making these stories work stands
in stark contrast to the powerful arguments that Blum and Harvey can
marshal about African-American appropriations and reformulations of the
white Jesus in the ages of slavery, reconstruction, and civil rights.

This leads me back to the story of the shattered window. White
supremacists murdered black girls and destroyed an image of a
white-skinned Jesus. The story fits perfectly with the book's thesis:
that looking closely at images of Jesus tells us much about the saga of
race in American history. It is hard, however, to find such a fitting
story in Indian country. The authors tell us that the Seneca prophet,
Handsome Lake, had a vision of Jesus. But we should remember that the
same vision included other powerful objects, such as the moon and stars,
as well as more befuddling items, including George Washington's dog.
Nicholas Black Elk saw not only a red-painted figure, but also a flaming
rainbow tepee in the sky. These stories are difficult to integrate into
narratives driven by developments in evangelical Christianity and the
black-white racial divide. To tell the story of Native Americans and
Jesus images will require many more close studies of the myriad ways
Indian communities have had Jesus presented to them in the last two
centuries, as well as the multiple and sometimes mystifying forms that
Indian visions of Jesus have taken. I commend Blum and Harvey for
featuring the Indian voices that our scholarship has made available. But
to integrate Indian voices and experiences into our works of synthesis,
we will need more scholarship.
