---
layout: article
title: "Review: No Sympathy for the Devil"
author-first: David W.
author-last: Stowe
author: David W. Stowe
author-note: "Darren E. Grem is an assistant professor of history and 
southern studies at the University of Mississippi."
vol: 14
year: 2012
book-reviewed: "David W. Stowe. <em>No Sympathy for the Devil: 
Christian Pop Music and the Transformation of American 
Evangelicalism</em>. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 
2011. 291 pp. ISBN 978-0-8078-3458-9."

---

With *No Sympathy for the Devil*, David W. Stowe provides a new history
of the formative years in Christian pop music. This is ground covered
before by Jay Howard and John Streck's *Apostles of Rock* (1999) and
Eileen Luhr's study of Christian youth culture in southern California*,
Witnessing Suburbia* (2009). But Stowe adds to this scholarship by
focusing on Christian pop music's political output, a point of emphasis
that requires---as he argues---"a more expansive definition of politics
than is often assumed by people analyzing U.S. history" (4). Drawing
from theoretical models that cast musical or artistic forms as "cultural
politics" that flow "from both social affiliations and aesthetic
ideologies," Stowe concludes that the boomer and countercultural ethos
of spiritual rebellion, self-discovery, and self-fulfillment---which
Mark Oppenheimer's *Knocking on Heaven's Doo**r* (2003) showed was
pervasive in American religion during the 1960s---shaped the early
Christian folk-rock-pop scene. By the late 1970s, Christian pop
musicians and an ascendant Christian music industry had laid the
cultural groundwork for evangelical musicians and listeners to bind with
an ascendant conservative movement while ironically ending up
"hermetically sealed in its own new niche, the parallel universe of
Christian popular culture"(9).

Stowe begins conventionally enough, opening with the Californian "Jesus
People" scene that Lisa McGirr and Darren Dochuk have also documented.
(Unlike their archive-based works, Stowe mostly relies on secondary
sources and interviews to reconstruct the Jesus People and their music,
as he does with his other subjects in the book.) Focusing primarily on
how music created a sense of community alongside and intertwined with
congregational communities like Calvary Chapel, Stowe chronicles the
early and later careers of musicians like Larry Norman, Randy Matthews,
Keith Green, and Barry McGuire. Praise bands like Love Song and Children
of the Day also appear as important vehicles for evangelical expression,
as do Andra√© Crouch and the Disciples, an African American soul group
who Stowe contends were "the first to achieve crossover success outside
a Christian music audience" (93).

Stowe convincingly describes how musical and theological porosity
defined the Jesus People in the late 1960s and Christian pop by the
mid-1970s. Borrowing theoretical insights from Thomas Tweed's *Crossing
and Dwelling* (2006), Stowe details the spiritual interests and voyages
of numerous artists generally considered by musical taxonomy as
"outside" the boundaries of Christian pop. For instance, though not
technically produced by evangelicals, Broadway hits like *Godspell* and
*Jesus Christ Superstar* were vital for clearing the way for Christian
musicians to believe they had an audience for their message and
countercultural stylings. Top 40 artists like Johnny Cash, Aretha
Franklin, Al Green, Earth, Wind & Fire, and Marvin Gaye also represented
a kind of Christian pop music, simultaneously dwelling in black and
white spiritual traditions and crossing "back and forth between spaces
understood to be properly religious and spaces thought to be profane or
worldly" (141). The mid-career interest of Bob Dylan---himself "born
again" in 1979---in demons and the apocalypse also bespoke of a popular
theology roughly "consistent with the conservative Christian worldview
reshaping American politics" (235). By framing his argument around such
religious interchanges, Stowe maps out the multiple roads into and out
of Christian pop music and expands the definition of "Christian pop,"
showing it to be a distinct but dynamic musical genre more pervasive
than previously thought.

In the book's last chapters, Stowe moves into a consideration of
Christian music's influence in a political age defined by Jimmy Carter
and Ronald Reagan. Explo '72, Campus Crusade for Christ's "Godstock"
youth festival in 1972, showed the potential payoff to conservatives for
appropriating rebellion and countercultural self-expressiveness for the
sake of evangelical identity politics. And, by the mid-1970s, the
"Religious Right was starting to beat the New Left at its own game,
using methods developed by sixties activists" (214). Advanced by the
rise of Christian music stations and corporate labels, the "Jesus
Movement-spirituality affected the way many evangelicals defined
themselves politically" (248), encouraging a union of individual
self-interest to moral restorationism to Christian nationalism,
especially among younger voters who began to tilt into the GOP camp in
the late 1970s.

Stowe's book is most persuasive when considering the contours of
Christian pop and rock in the 1970s and 1980s, namely the various ways
that Christian musicians understood themselves and their self-defined
purpose in promoting revivalism and religious boundary crossing before
and after 1976, famously called the "Year of the Evangelical." He is
less persuasive when trying to connect the "cultural front" that
Christian music advanced with the political restructurings of the day,
bordering on reductionism of the "rightward turn" or "rise of the
Christian Right" in American politics to youthful verve for
spiritually-inflected music. There is also an odd omission of certain
hot button issues of the 1970s and 1980s---such as the controversies
over sexual normativity---among the Christian musicians that Stowe
studies. Stowe mentions Marsha Carter and Lonnie Frisbee, both Jesus
People who later came out of the closet to cold-shoulder opposition from
many of their contemporaries in the Christian music scene. But such
curtailing of sexuality by Christian musicians and by the industry
itself is not detailed further; rather, marquee Christian Right
activists and high-level politicians, not Christian musicians, remain
the primary agents in Stowe's account---as they are in countless other
accounts---for pushing a heterosexual agenda. Thus, sexuality and, to a
lesser extent, race, appear not as analytic tools for understanding the
boundaries that Christian musicians may or may not have wanted to
maintain in modern America but as the lines crossed by the musicians.
This sets up Stowe's analysis of Christian music to overlook, rather
than explicate, the cultivation of legitimizing and de-legitimizing
power by culture-making institutions and individuals. It also limits his
book's ability to explain the tendency of Christian pop to dwell in its
own sub-market of like-minded producers and consumers instead of
crossing more often and more fully into the broader music market.

Still, Stowe has provided an intriguing, important, and readable book,
ably showing both the sympathies that conservative Christians held
toward the "devil" of rock 'n roll and countercultural affectations.
Though it might not have "transformed" evangelicalism into a cultural
front or political force as thoroughly or as fundamentally as Stowe
implies, Christian pop music has been suitably recaptured by the author
as an important facet of the contemporary religious marketplace.
