---
layout: article
title: "Review: The Color of Christ"
author-first: Darren E.
author-last: Grem
author: Darren E. Grem
author-note: "Darren E. Grem is an assistant professor of history and southern studies at the University of Mississippi."
vol: 14
year: 2012
book-reviewed: "Edward J. Blum and Paul Harvey. <em>The Color of Christ: The Son of God and
the Saga of Race in America</em>. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina
Press, 2012. 281 pp. ISBN 978-0-8078-3572-2."
---

With *The Color of Christ*, Edward J. Blum and Paul Harvey provide a
fascinating history of Jesus as a racial powerbroker in America. It is
certainly not the first critical biography of an Americanized Son of
God. But it is the first to consider---in as comprehensive a way as
possible---why Jesus became the "holy face" of whiteness by the
mid-nineteenth century, a status routinely challenged since then but not
fully overturned today.

The authors convincingly argue that the making of the white Christ was
intertwined with the making of the nation itself. For nearly two
centuries after Jesus first crossed the Atlantic, the raceless,
disembodied Jesus of European colonists and African slaves stood
alongside or in conflict with the blood-soaked suffering servant who
became "a symbol of \[Native American\] experiences" since "\[i\]f the
sacred bled, then their bleeding could be meaningful as well"(66). After
the revolution and into the early nineteenth century, this pre-white
Christ gave way to a powerfully white Christ who called the nation to
war over the status and substance of enslaved black souls, many of whom
were themselves recasting the white Jesus as "a suffering white man who
undermined white authority" and backed what the authors see as the
earliest version of black liberation theology (93). The newborn white
Christ, then, was not "a stable or completely unifying symbol of white
power," as his whiteness simultaneously defined the politics of slaves,
secessionists, abolitionists, and unionists before and during the Civil
War (8). Moreover, while white and black soldiers used the race of
Christ to fight over the meaning of slavery and freedom, Latter-Day
Saints unabashedly worshipped a white Christ and European immigrants
reworked his whiteness to suit their own religious needs or political
aspirations.

Into the twentieth century, Jesus continued his ascent as a conflicted,
white messiah, at once a champion of racial order, an advocate for
racial imperialism, and a catalyst for racial and political disturbance.
Fundamentalists and liberals, socialists and capitalists, saber-rattlers
and pacifists, New Dealers and Cold Warriors, segregationists and civil
rights workers, folk artists and race-conscious writers crafted a Christ
"for every crusade," generally casting him racially in their own image
(224). Because of the resilience of the white Christ and the
proliferation of his non-white counterparts, by the end of the twentieth
century, Jesus's appearance and identity had become a fitting religious
example of what Daniel Rodgers has recently termed "the age of fracture"
(2011). Despite Barack Obama's entering the White House as a victorious
black Christ figure, tragedy, dressed as comedy, remained as well. The
target of Hollywood satire and butt of late-night jokes, Jesus was no
triumphant national savior. Because of his racial past, the American
Jesus was "unable to resolve racial tensions of hundreds of years of
discrimination, of civil rights victories half-won and half-avoided, and
of dynamic changes to the demography of the nation" (265).

Blum and Harvey's story is at once a case study and synthesis. They
travel many roads familiar to most historians of American religion,
albeit with a fresh set of questions. How did millions of Americans come
to believe in the outright falsehood, namely that a Galilean Jew (which
*Popular Mechanics* in 2000 concluded probably [looked like this][]) was
somehow white? And why did others reject this white Christ for the sake
of revering a---similarly inaccurate---black or Indian Jesus more
suitable to their personal and political purposes? In addressing both
questions, Blum and Harvey delve into the processes of religious
production, consumption, inclusion, exclusion, negotiation,
normalization, enforcement, and resistance. The racial history of the
American Jesus shows how "the sacred has been racialized and how the
spiritualization of race has given notions of human difference not only
a life beyond scientific studies or anthropological insights but also a
sense of eternal worth" (15). There is a hint of convention to this
conceptual focus that some readers may find unsatisfactory. To study
religion's public and private power, Blum and Harvey focus on what most
scholars would deem an obviously religious figure. This is not a radical
reinterpretation of what constitutes "the religious" and will probably
not impress those who seek to expand "the religious"---or, to use that
squishier term "the spiritual"---to subjects and sites such as those
generally [detailed in the recent Frequencies project][]. (Full
disclosure: I contributed an entry for this project.) But by relating
the religious to more than individualistic experience or the scholar's
definitional delight, *The Color of Christ* also does a service---like
the work of Tisa Wenger and David Sehat---in reminding scholars that the
process of religious construction often comes with high stakes: for free
exercise, for citizenship, for even life or death. Indeed, religious
terms and conditions matter for defining "acceptable" persons and for
determining the legal, political, or national limits of human value.

Blum and Harvey, however, find some saviors as more worthy of study than
others. This is not the case for their treatment of the colonial era and
nineteenth century. The sheer number of Jesuses covered and analyzed is
impressive, as is their careful explanation of the white Christ's
origins and his public empowerment and proliferation. It is when the
authors reach the twentieth century, however, that gaps in coverage
appear and chances to explain historical change and continuity go by
inexplicably. For instance, there is little discussion of the crusading
Christ of Prohibition and an odd silence regarding the militaristic and
often racist Christ of World War II. Franklin D. Roosevelt, arguably the
most important messianic figure of the 1930s and 1940s, is barely
mentioned. This seems like a missed opportunity to explore the nature of
those whom Americans deem political messiahs and how conceptions of
"white saviors" fit into that construction. The authors do a fine job of
elucidating the multiple uses of Jesus during the civil rights struggle
among a wide range of activists, but one wonders how a Christ of civil
rights connects to contemporary black religious communities and
practices. Recent reflections on masculinity and femininity in African
American churches and among black televangelists have drawn attention to
a Jesus who seemingly sides with complementarian gender roles and
entrepreneurial values. Is this a new Jesus or an old one?

More distressingly, there is no clear Christ of conservatism presented
in *The Color of Christ*, nor a clear indication that the authors have
worked out how race related to whatever "rightward turn" has or has not
happened in postwar American politics and Christology. Presumably,
upstart conservatives defended the white Christ of the Cold War, the
civil rights era, and early and late culture wars. This we can deduce or
assume from the research provided by a slew of recent political and
cultural histories of American conservatism. But without a Christ of the
right in sight, it is unclear how Christ operated in conservative
popular culture, especially in terms of what their Jesus reveals about
how racial politics intersected with consumerism or gender in the
conservative movement. Why were FDR and the New Deal, the political
white Christ and gospel of liberalism, imagined as both anti-Christ and
anti-Christian among those on the right, [as Matthew Sutton has recently
documented][]? Why do conservative women warm to their vision of Christ,
and why is a white Christ necessary for their romance? Why is there so
much literature in conservative evangelical circles about spiritual
polyandry, as seen in the common practice of "inviting" a white Christ
into a heterosexual marriage? And how would a non-white Christ upset the
marital arrangements that conservatives promote, especially in terms of
their advocacy of "male headship" at church and in the home? In a
different context, why do *Relevant*-reading white hipster conservatives
and middle-aged conservative whites such devotees of the long-haired,
womanly "rebel" Christ, as the authors seem to suggest? Or, put a
different way, why do conservatives advocate strongly against homosexual
unions or public displays of homosexual affection---especially
between men---while at the same time trumpeting "Real Men" as those
who enjoy a deep, committed, and public intimacy with a muscular, white
god-man (and not, presumably, a god-man of another race)? In what ways
do these conceptions of a white Christ overlap with pro-gun lobbies or
tax cuts or deregulation or AM radio fandom, as [the cartoon
satirized here][]? How might they overlap with the various
"white saviors" of the conservative movement, clearly denoted by
political deference to promise-filled leaders from Jerry Falwell to
Anita Bryant to George W. Bush to Rick Warren to Sarah Palin? How might
a non-white Jesus muck with the outright worship of Ronald Reagan among
conservatives and, nowadays, among many other Americans? These are no
mere academic questions, but something that strikes to the heart of Blum
and Harvey's understanding of the white Christ's prevalence in
contemporary public life. In many ways, the white Christ has ascended
and keeps ascending not just in the conservative movement but because of
the conservative movement. To be sure, the authors adequately laid the
groundwork for understanding the rise of the right's Christ, but as with
much of their treatment of the twentieth century, they suggest
connections rather than necessarily argue for them.

Another odd privileging of certain Christs occurs with two other groups:
Mormons and Latinos. To be honest, it is not quite clear why the Mormon
Christ receives several sections of artful and attentive analysis while
the many Christs of American Latinos (after about 1750) get little more
than brief interludes on Gustavo Gutiérrez, Cesar Chavez, and gang
tattoos. True, we may be in a "Mormon moment." And Blum and Harvey offer
their own perspective by linking the construction of the white Christ to
the Mormon Christ. But it is arguable that the Latino Christ has been
vastly more important in terms of public culture, economic history, and
racial politics in American history. Moreover, regardless of whether
Republican Party candidate Mitt Romney can become the first Mormon
President, the fate of his party and much of the course of the
twenty-first century will be decided by a Latino population whose
Christs have been in dialogue with and even dominant in creating,
curtailing, commanding, and killing the white Christ. The Mormon
experience with Jesus is a necessary and instructive part of the book;
the Latino experience, however, remains a relatively unexamined story,
at least in Blum and Harvey's otherwise fine treatment of Jesus's
American faces.

Such a sweeping reevaluation of Jesus and American religious history
like *The Color of Christ* will have its gaps and missed opportunities.
And, at the end of the day, this book is memorable for what it achieves,
not for its unevenness. Blum and Harvey's book should be in the running
for several awards, if nothing else for documenting a central dynamic in
American religious experience---the construction and use of an iconic
religious figure---as a way of traversing what they aptly term "the saga
of race in America." *The Color of Christ* also serves as a good model
for future research into messianism and American culture and politics.
It is certain to arrest or anger readers who worship the white Christ or
revere those politicians and public figures who assume this is the
"normal" face of "their America." So too will its relatively dour
conclusion disturb those who hope for clear paths to racial
reconciliation. But then again, this book is not fatalist. It merely
questions whether some wounds can ever heal, especially those caused by
Jesus himself.

  [looked like this]: http://www.popularmechanics.com/science/health/forensics/1282186
  [detailed in the recent Frequencies project]: http://freq.uenci.es/
  [as Matthew Sutton has recently documented]: http://jah.oxfordjournals.org/content/98/4/1052.extract
  [the cartoon satirized here]: http://www2.far2muchtime.com/pics/brains/religious-right-jesus.gif
