---
layout: article
title: "Review: Father Mercer"
author-first: Keith
author-last: Harper
author: Keith Harper
author-note: "Keith Harper is a professor of Baptist studies at 
Southeastern Baptist Theological Seminary."
vol: 14
year: 2012
book-reviewed: "Anthony L. Chute. <em>Father Mercer: The Story of a 
Baptist Statesman</em>.  Macon, Ga.: Mercer University Press, 2011. 146 
pp.  ISBN 978-0-88146-262-3."
---

Mention Jesse Mercer's name to someone from Georgia and reactions may
vary from puzzled looks to acknowledging nods. Mention Mercer's name to
a Georgia Baptist and you are apt to receive a much different reaction.
Anthony L. Chute's *Father Mercer: The Story of a Baptist Statesman*
chronicles the life of one of the state's most influential ministers and
the early republic's quintessential Baptists.

Mercer's story is familiar, thanks largely to Chute's earlier work *A
Piety Above the Common Standard: Jesse Mercer and Evangelical Calvinism*
(2004). The son of Silas Mercer, a respected eighteenth-century Baptist
minister, Jesse Mercer (1769--1841) followed in his father's footsteps.
He played a crucial role in rallying the state's Baptists to support
missions in the early nineteenth century. His peers recognized his
leadership abilities and tapped him to be the president of the Georgia
Baptist Convention, a position he held from 1822 until 1841. In addition
to missions, Mercer used his talents and position to advance sunday
schools, temperance, and education. In fact, Mercer was so influential
in educational matters that when Georgia's Baptists organized a school
to train young ministers in 1833, they named it the Mercer Institute.
Later, when the institute became a university the trustees retained
Mercer's name, hence Mercer University.

While they articulate similar themes, *Father Mercer* differs from *A
Piety Above the Common Standard* in several respects. At 146 pages,
*Father Mercer* is brief: one may think of it as a general-audience
companion to *A Piety Above the Common Standard*. *Father Mercer* has
neither footnotes nor endnotes. Hardcore academics may carp that Chute
failed to follow citation protocol, but the author is clearly aiming at
two distinct audiences and ultimately provides interested readers with
the best of two different worlds. On one hand, those searching for a
thorough, more technically nuanced biography of Jesse Mercer will profit
by reading *A Piety Above a Common Standard*. On the other hand,
interested readers, especially lay people and non-professional
historians, will benefit from *Father Mercer*. Chute obviously wanted to
produce a short, readable volume that "humanized" Mercer, Tthough one
might wish that he had included more of Mercer's correspondence. .

It is hardly novel for authors to produce short editions of larger
works. Such slimmer books allow greater access to a broader readership.
Still, trying to reach two different audiences with similar material is
a bold move. But *Father Mercer* is such an easy read that it is
suitable for the most general audience. Chute attempted to assess Mercer
favorably without turning him into a superhero. The volume is a success
on all counts.
