---
layout: article
title: "Review: Southern Prohibition"
author: Paul Harvey
author-first: Paul
author-last: Harvey
author-note: "Paul Harvey is a professor of history at the University of
Colorado, Colorado Springs."
vol: 14
year: 2012
book-reviewed: "Lee L. Willis. <em>Southern Prohibition: Race, Reform, and
Public Life in Middle Florida, 1821&ndash;1920</em>. Athens: University of Georgia 
Press, 2011. 209 pp. ISBN 978-0-8203-2927-7."
---

This informative and entertaining study, full of maps and photographs of
the paraphernalia of nineteenth-century alcohol culture and consumption,
revisits an old question in fresh ways. Willis traces the "long
temperance movement" in the South, with Florida as his focus---and not
just alcohol but also other psychoactive substances as his target as
well (4). The key to understanding this long history is to shed the
assumption that antebellum reform, because of its associations with
abolitionism, never "hit" the South, and thus that temperance and
Prohibition were relative latecomers to the region. Willis begins by
pointing out that many southern states, including Florida, did have
state-enforced Prohibition for some residents, namely, black residents
in the antebellum era. Further, Willis demonstrates that temperance
societies came to middle Florida with the settlement of the region by
whites, and it was precisely fears of the accessibility of alcohol to
blacks and rowdy poor whites that spurred much of this early movement to
restrict alcohol sales, set rules for taverns and grog shops, and tax
liquor. Moreover, political divisions between Whigs and Democrats, the
former favorable to temperance and the latter initially not, mirrored
national political divisions, and Florida's politics over time grew both
less democratic and less violent as Whig proponents of progress and
reform regularized the governance of the young state and cracked down
mostly on lower-class drinking habits and establishments. 

The Civil War and Reconstruction saw the single greatest setback for the
cause of temperance: with emancipation came the legal ability of new
black citizens to obtain alcohol if and when they wanted it. Together
with the political disturbances of the Reconstruction era, this
transformation in the accessibility of alcohol to the "dangerous
classes" fueled a renewed interest in Prohibition. Willis traces this
story in Leon and Franklin counties in his final two chapters,
concluding that "the evolution from temperance to prohibition reflected
a desire to bring order to a society that reformers regarded as
disturbingly unstable" (103). Unlike other parts of the country, the
male-led Sons of Temperance and groups such as local option leagues took
the lead in spreading the gospel of temperance; the Woman's Christian
Temperance Union came later, and plays a relatively smaller role in this
book. Willis also finds that campaigns for children's safety and welfare
were central to the rise of Prohibition, and that whites were interested
in alcohol control as part of a program of social control for blacks,
but that black reformers "viewed prohibition as a means to social
improvement, not social control" (105).

Throughout the book, too, Willis sets alcohol within the broader context
of opium, tobacco, and other narcotics. The deleterious effects of
alcohol drew constant, and justified, attention from reformers, but
"opiates such as laudanum and paregoric were hallmarks of the global
psychoactive revolution, and their availability in territorial Florida
indicates that in terms mind-altering substances, this region was hardly
a frontier" (25). Narcotics later demonized as "dangerous drugs" drew
few comments in the nineteenth century. Teetotalers had no problem
taking their tinctures of opium, and dipping into an entire range of
pharmacopeia. The war on drugs amounted to a war on alcohol, one with
frequent twists and turns through the course of the century. Early
twentieth-century Prohibitionists were the first to take on opiates
beyond alcohol, and developed the regime that separated "alcohol" from
"drugs," a distinction with enormous consequences down to our day. 

Conspicuously absent from most of this story is women, whether as
individuals or organized into the WCTU. Willis concludes with some
questions about the notable fact of "women's marginalization in
temperance organizations" in middle Florida: "By not giving due
consideration to the men's organizations, have women's historians
overemphasized the role that women played in the movement? What
consequences do varying degrees of male and female participation in
reform have on political culture"? (158) To my mind, the most important
conclusion is the clear connection between the relative weakness of the
WCTU in the region and the lateness of the state in adopting women's
suffrage. 

Willis tells a complex, nuanced story, in the best tradition of using
local history to ponder larger questions. The focus not just on alcohol
but on psychoactive substances generally gives the study an originality
beyond other works on alcohol control in the South, and the use of
archaeological evidence from recent digs in Florida, including evidence
drawn from major fires as well as digs that turned up French champagne
bottles and Bordeaux was labels from territorial-era Apalachicola, will
appeal to enthusiasts of material culture. Students of southern religion
will note that the work of evangelicals was necessary, but very far from
sufficient, in accomplishing their treasured goals of temperance, for
Willis's work presents a multi-causal history that cannot be reduced to
any one factor. 

