---
layout: article
title: "Native American Religions in the Early South"
author-first: Tracy Neal
author-last: Leavelle
author: Tracy Neal Leavelle
author-note: "Tracy Neal Leavelle is an associate professor of history 
at Creighton University."
vol: 14
year: 2012
---

"In the beginning there was no fire, and the world was cold," according
to Cherokee storytelling traditions. The Thunders sent lightning upon
the land and created fire in the bottom of a hollow sycamore tree that
grew on an island. The animals could see the smoke rising from the top
of the tree and gathered in council to decide how they could obtain the
fire. Several birds flew to the island---Raven, Screech-owl, Hooting
Owl, Horned Owl---but the heat was too much for them. Two snakes swam
across the water, but they too failed to return with fire. After another
council, the Water Spider said she would go. She spun a little bowl,
placed it on her back, and crossed the water to the burning tree. "She
put one little coal of fire into her bowl, and came back with it, and
ever since we have had fire."[^1]

In the late nineteenth century, between 1887 and 1890, the ethnologist
James Mooney listened to Eastern Cherokee elders who shared a range of
stories, including this one on the origins of fire. A'yun'ini, or
"Swimmer," provided most of them. He had been born in the 1830s and
remained prominent in the ceremonial life of the community until his
death in 1899. Another elder, John Ax, was around ninety years old when
he spoke to Mooney. He was an authority on Cherokee customs and had a
living memory of such early nineteenth-century events as the Creek wars
and agreements with the United States. Mooney collected the stories of
these and other Cherokee men into his magnificent volume *Myths of the
Cherokees*.[^2]

The book was typical of the Bureau of American Ethnology projects of the
time; it was part of an effort to gather ethnographic and linguistic
data before aging elders passed away and "authentic" Native knowledge
and traditions disappeared. Mooney conducted most of his work in the
mountains of Carolina---and not in Oklahoma, where most of the Cherokees
lived---because there he found the kind of Indians he was looking for.
"Far away from the main-traveled road of modern progress, the Cherokee
priest still treasures the legends and repeats the mystic rituals handed
down from his ancestors," he wrote. "There is change indeed in dress and
outward seeming, but the heart of the Indian is still his own."[^3]

Although Mooney knew that ceremonies like the Green Corn Festival
continued, he believed that a coherent "national legend is now lost
forever."[^4] Nonetheless, *Myths of the Cherokee* is a remarkable
cultural document. It preserves stories about the origins of the world,
the character of animals and other beings, historical events, and local
legends and lore*.*And despite Mooney's concern with loss, *Myths of the
Cherokee* reflects a deep knowledge of the past. The stories reveal an
unbroken connection to the long history of the Cherokees and to their
location in the world, even while they acknowledge the profound
significance of change. The stories are as much about change as they are
about tradition.

One fascinating story linked the Cherokees to the great mounds that
stood impressively at many places in the region. Fire-keepers at these
mounds maintained sacred and eternal fires for the people. According to
the account, "just before the Green-corn dance, in the old times, every
fire in the settlement was extinguished and all the people came and got
new fire." The gift of the Thunders and the Water Spider burned at the
center of Cherokee life. The story also provided a religious explanation
for the tragedies of the nineteenth century. Trouble came to the nation
when the most powerful ceremonial items the Cherokees possessed were
lost to conflict and "the old religion was neglected." The storyteller
ended, "all the old things are gone now and the Indians are
different."[^5]

It would be easy in writing the history of Native American religion in
the South to follow the path set by Mooney, from an idealized and fully
developed ritual life, through periods of conflict and rapid
assimilation, and finally to a gradual and inevitable decline. In the
historical sketch that opens the volume, Mooney concludes of the Eastern
Cherokee: "the older people still cling to their ancient rites and
sacred traditions, but the dance and the ballplay wither and the Indian
day is nearly spent."[^6] The very richness of the oral traditions
recorded in the text and the complex history Mooney himself recounts
argue against such simple narratives of decline. Indians are different,
but they have not disappeared. Some fires have even been rekindled.

Scholars of Native history in the American South have mostly abandoned
the vanishing Indian myth that provided an intellectual framework for
Mooney and an ideological foundation for assimilationist projects.
Tribal members, historians, archaeologists, and anthropologists have
challenged conventional narratives and addressed the complexity of the
past. Still, of the many studies that have appeared in the last thirty
years or so, few have focused specifically on religion. Politics,
diplomacy, trade, disease, and the emergence of new Native identities
have all received more attention than religion. The study of Native
religion in the South remains underdeveloped despite the efforts of
several important scholars.

In a 1997 essay, religious studies scholar Joel Martin made a case for a
postcolonial history of American religion through an analysis of contact
and colonialism in the Deep South. Martin called for a reorientation
"informed by the new history on Indians and stimulated by the
contemporary perspectives of Indian intellectuals." He proposed that we
"turn from accounts that suggest Indians disappeared to those that
depict Indians as constant participants in American life. We can
progress from narratives that ignore uneven power relations to those
that explain how these relations affected religious history and
historiography."[^7]

Martin cited 10,000 years of contact history in the South, only 2% of
which involved the interactions of Native people with Europeans and
Americans. This is the deep history revealed by Mooney's storytellers
and by contemporary archaeologists alike. The long history of dynamic
and changing Native American communities is important in its own right,
but the cultural and social forms that emerged through the centuries
also provided the context for colonial contact, conflict, and exchange.
The Hernando de Soto expedition of 1539--1542 entered a complex society
of Mississippian chiefdoms, a world the Spaniards failed to understand.
Although weakened by colonial violence and disease, Mississippian-style
chiefdoms survived until the destruction of the Natchez in the
eighteenth century.

At the same time, Martin urged historians of American religion to
consider the ways that contact affected all of the people involved, not
just Native Americans. He wrote, "sometimes \[contact\] was direct and
face-to-face, as when Anglo-Americans and African Americans entered
Creek country. Other times it was indirect, mediated by journalism,
political rhetoric, sermons, folktales, literature, artifacts, and
artistic works."[^8] These exchanges still occurred in an environment
shaped by colonialism, and one cannot comprehend the many religiously
inspired resistance movements and other historical developments without
paying attention to the effects of invasion and conquest.

Martin provided some interesting examples of what a postcolonial
religious history might look like. These histories would span a much
longer chronology, beginning not with European contact but with hundreds
or even thousands of years of religious change. They would account for
both cultural exchange and the presence of uneven power relations.
Indians would not disappear from the narratives. They would remain, as
they have in American life, a major influence on the religious
development of the United States. It might seem a little premature to
call such a narrative postcolonial when many Native intellectuals and
others have identified ongoing colonial processes (the appropriation of
Native religious forms is a prime example) and advocated for further
decolonization of Native peoples, lands, and cultures.[^9] The
postcolonial moment may not have arrived for American Indians, but the
challenge posed by Martin remains.

Native religious history did not begin with the emergence of the
Atlantic world. The Cherokee oral tradition about the mounds is in part
an account of change over time. The Mississippian tradition responsible
for the sacred landscape in the river valleys of the South and Midwest
flourished for around six hundred years and lasted well into the era of
European colonization. The tradition was rooted in thousands of years of
cultural development that included the adoption of maize agriculture,
the rise and fall of powerful chiefdoms, the elaboration of trade
networks, the mobilization of labor for massive building projects, and
the appearance of ceremonial and symbolic systems whose influence
continued long after the last Great Sun, the spiritually and politically
powerful chief of the Natchez.[^10]

The spectacular mounds of Cahokia, just east of St. Louis, seem to get
most of the attention from historians. The great Mississippian chiefdom
is a useful example to counter the beliefs of those who remain skeptical
about the presence of Indian civilization in North America. Cahokia
flourished between the eleventh and thirteenth centuries. At the height
of its power and influence, Cahokia had a population of between 3000 and
16,000 people. Some archaeologists contend the population was much
higher, as high as 30,000 people, comparable to the population of
medieval London.[^11]

In any case, the political, ceremonial, and trade center linked a
densely populated region of mound complexes, villages, and fields. The
residents constructed more than one hundred earthen mounds through
centuries of occupation. The largest is known today as Monk's Mound.
More than one hundred feet tall and covering sixteen acres, Monk's Mound
is the largest ancient earthwork in North America. It contains
21,700,000 cubic feet of earth, carried in baskets and packed and shaped
under the supervision of expert builders. Four large open plazas aligned
to the cardinal directions surround the flat-topped pyramid, and lesser
mounds stretch beyond this central site according to a careful plan. In
the thirteenth century, a thatched building--perhaps a temple--rose from
the heights. The mounds elevated the political and priestly elite,
allowing them to see and be seen by the commoners who lived below them.
Public ceremonies in the great plazas, the coordinated construction and
annual reinforcement of mounds, and elaborate mortuary practices
supported elite claims to power. These activities and the possibility of
shared mythologies and symbolic systems created ritual connections
between the different levels of society.[^12]

Equally interesting from a historical standpoint is Natchez, where we
have the archaeological record as well as written documents. We know the
names of specific people---the Europeans knew three Great Suns, the
political and ceremonial leaders of the community. Archaeological
investigations in the 1960s and 1970s showed that occupation of the
"Grand Village of the Natchez," known to archaeologists as the
Fatherland site, had started by the thirteenth century. Development in
this location occurred just as Cahokia was going into its decline.
European trade goods at the site demonstrated its continued occupation
into the era of colonial contact, and archaeologists have verified many
of the observations made by European visitors in the seventeenth and
eighteenth centuries. In the first synthesis of this history for almost
a century, James Barnett describes the complexity of Natchez society and
culture and shows how important this powerful Mississippi River nation
became in the colonial contest between the French and the English.[^13]

In 1700 the French colonial official Pierre LeMoyne d'Iberville visited
the Grand Village and provided the earliest written description of the
site based on direct experience. Iberville found the Great Sun and many
others sick from dysentery. The Great Sun's home was large, twenty-five
by forty-five feet, and sat on a raised earthen platform ten feet high.
The temple mound was around the same height as the chief's mound and
bounded a large open plaza "about 250 paces wide and 300 long,"
according to the French visitor.[^14]

The memoirist Antoine-Simon Le Page du Pratz provided the most detailed
account of the Natchez in the eighteenth century. Du Pratz arrived in
the French colony of Louisiana in 1718 and two years later established a
plantation in the Natchez territory. For a decade, he observed and
interacted with his Native neighbors and documented the region's human
and natural history. Du Pratz reported, "during my residence among the
Natchez I contracted an intimate friendship, not only with the chiefs or
guardians of the temple, but with the Great Sun, or the sovereign of the
nation, and his brother the Stung Serpent, the chief of the
warriors."[^15] His familiarity with Natchez leadership, language, and
culture makes his descriptions particularly valuable. Du Pratz witnessed
the death and dramatic funeral of the Stung Serpent in 1725. He also
described the large temple and its origins. According to the temple
guardian, a man and wife had come many years ago from the sun to teach
the Natchez how to live properly. The man provided moral instruction and
told the people how to construct the temple. He explained further "that
in the temple they should eternally preserve a fire, which he would
bring down from the sun."[^16] On a tour, Du Pratz found that the
eternal flame was kept in the larger of the two rooms that made up the
temple. An altar table next to the sacred fire held the bones of a
previous Great Sun. The ceremonial life Du Pratz described in his book
lasted until the defeat and dispersal of the Natchez by the French in
the early 1730s.[^17]

Scholars have produced excellent studies on the transformation of the
Mississippian-style chiefdoms, the impact of European colonization, and
the emergence of new ethnic identities in the South. Most notable is
Patricia Galloway's highly influential *Choctaw Genesis, 1500--1700*
(1995), which uses the archaeological record and European maps and
travel narratives to document the ethnogenesis of the modern Choctaws.
More recently, a collection of essays edited by Robbie Ethridge and
Sheri Schuck-Hall, *Mapping the Mississippian Shatter Zone* (2009),
connects the colonial Indian slave trade to widespread regional
instability and dramatic social and cultural change. Many of the
contributors to this collection have also written book-length studies on
the colonial era. For the most part, however, religion remains a
relatively under-examined feature of Native communal adjustments to
European colonization in the sixteenth through the eighteenth centuries.
The latter volume does contain an essay on the Natchez which makes the
provocative assertion that Tattooed Arm, sister of the Great Sun, tried
to convert a Catholic missionary priest to the Natchez religion and then
had a son with him---a boy who grew up to become the last Great Sun. The
author contends that the treatment of the missionary reflected the
common Natchez practice of making outsiders into kin.[^18]

Nevertheless, missionization and its effects on Native communities in
the South constitute an area of study that requires substantially more
investigation. The field is still not nearly as well developed as it is
for other colonial regions like New England, New France, and most of the
Spanish colonies of the Americas. In recent decades, scholars working on
a variety of topics have developed a much more sophisticated
understanding of colonial religious encounters, conversion and the
indigenization of Christianity, and the role of religious change in
social and economic life, diplomacy and politics, and more.[^19]
Colonial missions in the South have not been entirely ignored and it is
worth noting some of the more prominent examples of the work that
already exists. Hopefully, the presence of this work combined with the
influential scholarship on missions and Native Christianity that has
appeared in recent decades will encourage scholars to ask new questions
about missions, Native peoples, and Christianity in the South.

Archaeologist and anthropologist Jerald Milanich has done a lot to bring
the history of the extensive mission networks of Spanish Florida into
the conversation. His work, highlighted by *Laboring in the Fields of
the Lord: Spanish Missions and Southeastern Indians* (1999), reveals the
impact of missions on the many Native communities that were incorporated
into the colonial world of the Spanish Caribbean. The Jesuits arrived to
evangelize and to help secure Spanish claims to Florida soon after the
establishment of St. Augustine in 1565. The Jesuit missions were not
very successful and the Society of Jesus withdrew its personnel in the
1570s. Spanish colonial officials still had a legal and moral obligation
to expand the kingdom of Christ, and they needed Indian allies and
Indian labor. They turned to the Franciscans, who developed a large
network of missions across northern Florida and adjacent territories.
According to Milanich, "the goals of the Franciscan missions were to
save the souls of the Indians while shaping their minds and controlling
their bodies, all in support of Spanish interests." The missionaries
targeted influential chiefs for conversion as a way to gain access to
larger populations. Milanich argues that Franciscan efforts were quite
successful in the seventeenth century, leading to widespread acceptance
of Christianity and a blend of old and new cultural practices.[^20]

There was a terrible cost for Native communities, however. Milanich
writes, "the missions of Spanish Florida should be viewed not as a
benign offshoot of colonialism, but as colonialism itself. Religious
education was a calculated way to save souls while converting a
potentially hostile population into a labor force that toiled in support
of the colony and its colonial overlords ... The light of knowledge
cannot brighten one dark truth: missions and colonialism must take most
of the blame for the disappearance of a significant portion of the
southeastern Indians."[^21] Milanich relies on both the archaeological
and documentary records to draw such conclusions. His work overlaps in
time with the studies of Galloway and others and offers plenty of
evidence that missions, and religion more broadly, should be included in
the analysis of change in the "shatter zone."

Religious studies scholar Michelene Pesantubbee is deeply informed by
this newer work on religious change. In *Choctaw Women in a Chaotic
World: The Clash of Cultures in the Colonial Southeast* (2005), she
tries to explain a decline in the status of Choctaw women during the
period of French colonization in the lower Mississippi Valley. The
ambitious study is concerned in particular with high-status Beloved
Women, an earned title well known from surrounding Indian nations like
the Cherokees, Creeks, and Chickasaws.[^22] Since European sources tend
to favor the actions of men, the reconstruction of Choctaw women's lives
is difficult. In her search for Choctaw Beloved Women, she uses whatever
documentary evidence she can find, but she also relies on cultural
narratives that supported a tradition of balance and complementarity in
the different roles of women and men.

Choctaw origin stories frequently refer to a migration to or emergence
from Nanih Waiya ("Leaning Mountain"), a sacred mound in Mississippi
often referred to in Choctaw as "Beloved Mother." The connection to the
mound links the Choctaws to an ancient spiritual landscape that remains
important to this day.[^23] Choctaw oral tradition recalls a time when
the people living near the mound did not have enough food to eat. Two
men went hunting to feed their village, but could only manage to catch a
single bird. Disappointed, they started to eat but soon heard a song
like a dove. Following the sound, they came upon a beautiful woman
standing atop a grassy mound. She, too, was hungry and they shared their
bird with her. She thanked them for saving her life and told them to
return to the mound the next summer. The men did so and found the first
corn plant, a gift from the woman and her father, the Great Spirit of
the Choctaws. Corn became the staple item in the Choctaw diet. The story
is certainly a beautiful expression of the ideal of reciprocity. The
narrative also underlines the value of women in Choctaw society, a
matrilineal, matrilocal society in which women performed most of the
agricultural work. In so many ways, Choctaw women were truly the givers
of life.[^24]

Pesantubbee describes a dramatic decline in the status of women in the
eighteenth century. A number of factors led to the collapse of the more
balanced gender relationships: the violence unleashed by the colonial
contest for interior North America, changing patterns of captivity and
redemption, and the work of Catholic missionaries to transform Choctaw
social structures.[^25] Pesantubbee complains that a lack of
documentation and a belief then and now that French Catholic
missionaries did not enjoy much success in the Louisiana colony has
contributed to the unmerited assumption that Christianity had little
impact on the Choctaws. She explains that both direct and indirect
contact with missionaries influenced the Choctaws and other Native
peoples in the region. Christian religious practices and ideas
circulated widely, although this indirect influence is difficult to
measure. Missionary activity in the lower Mississippi Valley and
surrounding areas began in earnest at the very end of the seventeenth
century, but many of the missions were short lived. Missionaries came
and went. The Jesuits lasted the longest, working throughout the region
and establishing the first mission among the Choctaws in 1727. However,
other orders also labored in these fields. The diocesan priests
sponsored by the Séminaire de Québec, for example, had mission stations
among the Natchez and others in the early seventeenth century.[^26]

Assessing their impact, Pesantubbee concludes that "missionary concern
about women's sexuality contributed to women's exclusion from two
important political activities: diplomatic ceremonies and war councils."
Furthermore, the missionaries introduced the concepts of sin and
forgiveness, forcing Native people to confront their own "ideas about
human nature and the spirit world."[^27] Colonialism pushed women to the
margins of Choctaw society, at least in certain respects, reducing their
visibility in critical public events and altering their place in the
family structure.

Pesantubbee poses important questions in her book about the changing
status of women in Choctaw society, although sometimes the answers to
those questions remain frustratingly incomplete. The fragmented
historical record explains part of the problem. However, there is
confusion about the work of the various missionary organizations. The
missionaries of the Society of Jesus and the Séminaire de Québec were in
competition with each other. Their training and methods were different.
The Jesuits of the eighteenth century were also not the same as those of
the seventeenth. Although the seventeenth-century martyrs of New France
inspired later missionaries, mission work had changed significantly in
the intervening decades. The Jesuits knew much more about Native
languages and cultures, and the colonial context had changed as well.
These distinctions are not always clear in the text. However, the
attempt to reconstruct the influence of Native women on cultural change
in the colonial era is a welcome trend. In this sense, Pesantubbee's
work builds on Theda Perdue's groundbreaking *Cherokee Women: Gender and
Culture Change, 1700--183* (1998)*5*.[^28]

Historically speaking, the story continues with Clara Sue Kidwell's
*Choctaws and Missionaries, 1818--1918* (1995), published a decade prior
to Pesantubbee's book. Rising nationalism, westward expansion, and
religious revival coalesced in the early nineteenth century into a
powerful assimilationist program supported by the federal government and
Christian missionary societies. The American Board of Commissioners for
Foreign Missions started the first mission to the Choctaw nation in
1818. The missionary program relied on education as the primary
instrument of conversion, but these early missions achieved
disappointing results as far as the missionaries were concerned. Many
Choctaws actively pursued educational opportunities and requested
schools for their regions, recognizing potential benefits, but they were
less interested in the social and cultural teachings that were so
central to the project of conversion. However, as Kidwell demonstrates,
"civilization was not the salvation of the Choctaw Nation."[^29]

In 1829 the state of Mississippi extended its authority over Choctaw
land in its effort to open the area to further resettlement. In the wake
of the Indian Removal Act of 1830, a minority of Choctaw leaders signed
the Treaty of Dancing Rabbit Creek. The 1830 treaty ceded Choctaw lands
to the United States and forced most Choctaws to move west to Indian
Territory. A few thousand remained in their Mississippi homeland,
however. According to Kidwell, "the Choctaws in Mississippi lost all
political autonomy. Without federal recognition or a land base, they
underwent a process of enclavement, surrounded by black and white
communities but part of neither."[^30]

Yet, the Choctaws survived as a people both in Mississippi, near the
sacred mound of Nanih Waiya, and in Oklahoma. The Choctaws used
assimilationist institutions like churches and schools to acquire
education and to help maintain strong communal connections. In making
her argument, Kidwell rejects traditional acculturation theory (the
"loss of culture" approach) for an examination of ethnic identity that
accounts for social and cultural change in a long process of encounter
and conflict.

Acculturation theory is a major component of the analytical framework
William McLoughlin employs in *Cherokees and Missionaries, 1789--1839*
(1984). Anthropological theories of culture loss and factionalism as
well as Geertzian definitions of culture are heavy influences on this
impressively researched and influential book. Even so, McLoughlin is
just as interested in Cherokee agency. McLoughlin may be primarily
concerned with, as he puts it, "ideological and social reorientations as
seen by those Cherokees who came face to face with the missionaries,"
but he also describes "the effect of the Cherokees upon the
conscientious white missionaries."[^31] While there is no question that
the missionaries contributed to the fragmentation of Cherokee society in
the period before removal, they also provided support for a remarkable
process of cultural revitalization, a development that McLoughlin has
called the Cherokee Renascence.[^32] Ultimately, McLoughlin concludes,
"what the Cherokees took from the missionaries they took on their own
terms and adapted to their own needs and perspectives."[^33]

McLoughlin believes that the turning point for the Cherokees was 1794,
the year they signed a treaty with the United States to end the conflict
related to their decision to side with Great Britain during the
Revolutionary War. The Cherokees faced difficult decisions: "they had
lost most of their hunting grounds and were almost surrounded by whites.
They retained the right of local self-government, but they were under
constant pressure from federal agents, factors, and missionaries to
alter their ways and beliefs."[^34] The Cherokees responded with an
extraordinary though not uncontested program of economic, social, and
cultural transformation. Missionaries became an integral part of this
process. The Moravians arrived at the beginning of the nineteenth
century, and the missionaries of the American Board of Commissioners for
Foreign Missions (ABCFM) followed not long after. ABCFM representatives
opened the Brainerd mission in 1817. Baptist ministers and Methodist
circuit riders also worked among the Cherokees in the years before
removal. Although some Cherokees adopted Christianity as a religious
faith and practice, many more remained consistently interested in the
practical skills like reading and writing that missionaries offered in
their schoolhouses. In many ways, Christianity supported Cherokee
revitalization. Some missionaries also acted as advocates for the
Cherokees during the debates over removal.

The Cherokees did not universally welcome the intrusion of these
foreigners into their nation and their lives. As McLoughlin
acknowledges, "increasing Protestant evangelism was a divisive as well
as a progressive force." Despite his reliance on the study of
factionalism as an organizing principle, McLoughlin does not fall into
the trap of creating static oppositional social groups to support his
argument. He writes, "Cherokee society in the 1820s was too complex to
be divided into simplistic categories such as pro- or anti-mission,
fullblood or mixed blood. Many other factors were at work: regionalism,
social class or wealth, slave ownership, kinship, and opinions regarding
the optimal amount and speed of change."[^35]

Two resistance movements stand out. The first is the so-called "Ghost
Dance" movement of 1811--1813. James Mooney applied this appellation to
a resurgence of Cherokee tradition in his massive study of the Ghost
Dance religion that swept the West in the 1880s. Visions and prophecies,
frightening earthquakes and a portentous comet, and the specter of war
provided energy for the revival of older religious practices. A vision
recorded by the Moravians contains warnings and a call for change:

the Mother of the Nation has forsaken you because all her bones are
being broken through the grinding \[of the mills\]. She will return to
you, however, if you put the white people out of the land and return to
your former manner of life. You yourselves can see that the white people
are entirely different beings from us; we are made from red clay; they,
out of white sand.[^36]

The man in the vision said that "neighborly relations" with whites would
be acceptable as long as the Cherokees recovered all of their sacred
Beloved Towns. McLoughlin does not view this movement as a complete
rejection of what he calls "acculturation," but rather as "an assertion
of Cherokee nationalism and a profound expression of their desire for
cultural autonomy."[^37] He contends that participants simply wanted to
shape change according to Cherokee standards as opposed to internalizing
the ideologies and attitudes of white Americans.

The second is White Path's Rebellion of 1827, another response to rapid
cultural change. This time the resistance was tied directly to rejection
of missionaries. Anti-mission sentiment had been rising for years, when
the Cherokee leader White Path (Nunnatsunnega) started openly opposing
the actions of the Cherokee National Council. The Council expelled White
Path in 1825. By 1827, White Path had become a prominent leader of a
rebel council and support of the missionaries plummeted even further.
White Path and others seemed to resent the growing power of the wealthy
mixed-blood elite and the missionaries who openly supported them.
McLoughlin contends that the rebellion "was not a reactionary movement
seeking simply a return to a lost past but rather an effort to keep
faith with their own heritage and identity as a people."[^38]

The cultural and social transformation of the Five Civilized Tribes has
taken up a lot of narrative space, but resistance movements like the
Cherokee "Ghost Dance" and White Path's Rebellion have received
increasing attention because they illuminate so well the diverse
experiences of Native peoples entangled in colonial processes. Gregory
Evans Dowd makes a compelling case for this turn in his interpretation
of the "religiously charged struggle for unity" led by such figures as
Neolin (the Delaware Prophet), Pontiac, Tenskwatawa (the Shawnee
Prophet), and Tecumseh.[^39] Dowd shows that at times supporters of
accommodation and adherents of nativism could live in harmony. In
certain times of crisis, however---during and after the Seven Years' War
and in the period leading up to the War of 1812---prophecy divided
communities even as visionaries sought to unite Indians against the
encroachments of white invaders. He writes, "during these periods,
constellations of individuals who possessed special knowledge of the
Great Spirit--those who came to be called 'prophets' by the
Anglo-Americans--rose to provide spiritual guidance to militant
followers charting the waters of intertribal diplomacy."[^40]

Alfred Cave includes a chapter on the Muskogee (Creek) Red Sticks in his
survey of Native American revitalization movements. In it, he
acknowledges the influence of a visit to the Muskogees in 1811 by
Tecumseh and a holy man associated with Tenskwatawa's prophetic
movement. Yet, he also argues that "the Muskogee world had its own
prophets, and those prophets had their own agenda and their own
timetable."[^41] The Red Stick leaders openly questioned the propriety
and the efficacy of the "civilization" program, and they urged the
people to return to the life created for them by the Great Spirit. The
prophets rejected Euro-American culture and advocated traditional gender
roles, with women growing crops and men involved in hunting. The Shawnee
Prophet's songs and rituals added elements to a spiritual movement
already underway. The prophecies bitterly divided the Muskogees, leading
to a bloody civil war. Andrew Jackson defeated supporters of the
movement in the Creek War of 1813--1814, although both supporters and
opponents of the Red Sticks suffered in the aftermath due to land
cessions and forced removal.

Lee Irwin profiles the Red Sticks and the Cherokee revival in his
sophisticated comparative study of American Indian prophecy. No single
volume better synthesizes the diverse and challenging material on
prophecy from ancient times to the present. A historian of religion,
Irwin examines what he calls the "ethnotheology" of the various
movements he describes. He explains, "ethnotheology refers to the
creative synthesis of indigenous religious beliefs (and practices) with
a variety of Christian theological ideas, particularly sin, salvation,
reward and punishment after death, and the moral teachings of kindness,
nonviolence, and the preservation of family and communal values."[^42]
Rather than seek some abstract unified theory of Native prophecy, Irwin
instead uses this concept as a flexible guide on a journey through
centuries of religious renewal and change.

Joel Martin's *Sacred Revolt: The Muskogees' Struggle for a New World*
(1991) remains the essential account of the Red Stick rebellion. Martin
provides the necessary context for understanding the origins and
development of the revolt. He views the movement as a creative response,
rooted in Muskogee religious traditions, to the crisis brought on by the
pressures of colonization: the trade in slaves and skins, the invasion
of Muskogee lands, and the U.S. civilizing mission. Tecumseh's visit and
a series of violent earthquakes in 1811 and 1812 only gave momentum to a
religious movement already in formation. Martin concludes, "the pattern
of action that informed the \[Muskogee\] revolt was modeled on traditional
rites of passage and world renewal ceremonies. The Redstick millenarian
movement of 1812--1814 was an initiation ceremony performed on a grand
collective scale."[^43]

The stories of these sacred revolts against colonization are a way to
recognize the complexity of the past, a complexity that is too easily
overlooked. James Mooney listened to some of these stories, but he
represented a common perspective that within only another generation or
so Indians would lose forever their authentic connections to real
traditions. Only ghosts and collections of texts would remain. Indians
might still perform a ceremony or two, but they would not be the same.
No serious person can discount the very real destruction caused by
colonization and conquest. However, the longer history of change and
continuity that goes back hundreds of years, well before the arrival of
Europeans and Africans, and the active and creative ways in which Native
peoples responded to colonization resist any narrative that relates only
a story of decline.

In his book on American Indian sacred places, Peter Nabokov tells of his
visit to the site of the great Cherokee white or peace town of Chota,
now under twenty feet of reservoir water in the Little Tennessee River
Valley. This Cherokee Beloved Town was in the eighteenth century a place
where one visitor explained that "the fire of Peace is always burning."
The Cherokees maintained the fire that Water Spider had acquired with
courage and ingenuity so long ago. Nabokov writes, "fire was the medium
of transformation, turning offerings into gifts for spiritual
intercessors or the four quarters of the earth. And when their coals
cooled off, fires left behind the symbols of charred blackness and
death, along with the ashen whiteness associated with peace and the
power of elders."[^44] It is easy enough when looking at the past to see
the darkness, to recount the story of death and destruction that is a
central part of the Native experience of colonization. However, it is
also worth searching for the "ashen whiteness" that offers another
perspective on change, the creative transformations of people engaged in
a struggle for freedom and dignity.

[^1]: James Mooney, *Myths of the Cherokee* (Washington, D.C.:
    Government Printing Office, 1902), 240--2.

[^2]: Ibid., 11, 236--7.

[^3]: Ibid., 12.

[^4]: Ibid., 229.

[^5]: Ibid., 395--7; and William A. Young, *Quest for Harmony: Native
    American Spiritual Traditions* (Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing,
    2002), 132, 140--1.

[^6]: Mooney, *Myths of the Cherokee*, 181.

[^7]: Joel W. Martin, "Indians, Contact, and Colonialism in the Deep
    South: Themes for a Postcolonial History of American Religion" in
    *Retelling U.S. Religious History*, ed. Thomas A. Tweed (Berkeley:
    University of California Press, 1997), 149--50.

[^8]: Ibid., 159.

[^9]: Vine Deloria, Jr., *For This Land: Writings on Religion in
    America*, ed. James Treat (New York: Routledge, 1999); George E.
    Tinker, *Spirit and Resistance: Political Theology and American
    Indian Liberation* (Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 2004); Waziyatawin
    Angela Wilson and Michael Yellowbird, eds., *For Indigenous Eyes
    Only: A Decolonization Handbook* (Santa Fe: School of American
    Research, 2005); and Tracy Neal Leavelle, "The Perils of Pluralism:
    Colonization and Decolonization in American Indian Religious
    History" in *After Pluralism: Rethinking Models of Interreligious
    Engagement*, eds. Courtney Bender and Pamela Klassen (New York:
    Columbia University Press, 2010), 156--77.

[^10]: Brian M. Fagan, *Ancient North America: The Archaeology of a
    Continent*, 4th ed. (New York: Thames and Hudson, 2005), 448--52,
    457--88; and Patricia Galloway, ed., *The Southeastern Ceremonial
    Complex: Artifacts and Analysis* (Lincoln: University of Nebraska
    Press, 1989).

[^11]: Colin G. Calloway, *First Peoples: A Documentary Survey of
    American Indian Histor*y, 4th ed. (Boston: Bedford/St. Martin's,
    2012), 34--6, 69; R. David Edmunds, Frederick E. Hoxie, and Neal
    Salisbury, *The People: A History of Native America* (Boston:
    Houghton Mifflin, 2007), 15--8; Michael Leroy Oberg, *Native
    America: A History* (Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell, 2010), 15--6; and
    Peter Nabokov, *Where the Lightning Strikes: The Lives of American
    Indian Sacred Places* (New York: Viking, 2006), 42--3.

[^12]: Fagan, *Ancient North America*, 470--5; Timothy R. Pauketat, "The
    Forgotten History of the Mississippians" in *North American
    Archaeology*, eds. Timothy R. Pauketat and Diana DiPaolo Loren
    (Malden, Mass.: Blackwell, 2005), 187--211.

[^13]: James F. Barnett, Jr., *The Natchez Indians: A History to 1735*
    (Jackson: University Press of Mississippi, 2007), xiv-xvi.

[^14]: Ibid., 39.

[^15]: Antoine-Simon Le Page du Pratz, *The History of Louisiana:
    Translated from the French of M. Le Page du Pratz*, ed. Joseph G.
    Tregle, Jr. (Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 1975),
    327.

[^16]: Ibid., 332.

[^17]: Nabokov, *Where the Lightning Strikes*, 43--6.

[^18]: Patricia Galloway, *Choctaw Genesis, 1500--1700* (Lincoln:
    University of Nebraska Press, 1995); Robbie Ethridge and Sheri M.
    Shuck-Hall, eds., *Mapping the Mississippian Shatter Zone: The
    Colonial Indian Slave Trade and Regional Instability in the American
    South* (Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 2009); and George
    Edward Milne, "Picking Up the Pieces: Natchez Coalescence in the
    Shatter Zone" in *Mapping the Mississippian Shatter Zone*, 388--417.

[^19]: Joel W. Martin and Mark A. Nicholas, eds., *Native Americans,
    Christianity, and the Reshaping of the American Religious Landscape*
    (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2010); and
    Nicholas Griffiths and Fernando Cervantes, eds., *Spiritual
    Encounters: Interactions between Christianity and Native Religions
    in Colonial America* (Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1999).

[^20]: Jerald Milanich, *Laboring in the Fields of the Lord: Spanish
    Missions and Southeastern Indians* (Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian
    Institution Press, 1999), 130--56.

[^21]: Ibid., xiv.

[^22]: Michelene E. Pesantubbee, *Choctaw Women in a Chaotic World: The
    Clash of Cultures in the Colonial Southeast* (Albuquerque:
    University of New Mexico Press, 2005), 1--2.

[^23]: Ibid., 20--3, 168; Nabokov, *Where the Lightning Strikes*,
    47--51.

[^24]: Pesantubbee, *Choctaw Women*, 19--23.

[^25]: Ibid., 34--85.

[^26]: Ibid., 59--67.

[^27]: Ibid., 77.

[^28]: Theda Perdue, *Cherokee Women: Gender and Culture Change,
    1700--1835* (Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1998).

[^29]: Clara Sue Kidwell, *Choctaws and Missionaries in Mississippi,
    1818--1918* (Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 1995), 115.

[^30]: Ibid., 162.

[^31]: William G. McLoughlin, *Cherokees and Missionaries, 1789--1839*
    (New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 1984).

[^32]: William G. McLoughlin, *Cherokee Renascence in the New Republic*
    (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1986).

[^33]: McLoughlin, *Cherokees and Missionaries*, 12.

[^34]: Ibid., 6.

[^35]: Ibid., 126.

[^36]: William G. McLoughlin, *The Cherokee Ghost Dance Movement: Essays
    on the Southeastern Indians, 1789--1861* (Macon, Ga.: Mercer
    University Press, 1984), 142.

[^37]: McLoughlin, *Cherokees and Missionaries*, 82.

[^38]: Ibid., 213.

[^39]: Gregory Evans Dowd, *A Spirited Resistance: The North American
    Indian Struggle for Unity, 1745--1815* (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins
    University Press, 1992), xiii.

[^40]: Ibid., xviii.

[^41]: Alfred A. Cave, *Prophets of the Great Spirit: Native American
    Revitalization Movements in Eastern North America* (Lincoln:
    University of Nebraska Press, 2006), 143.

[^42]: Lee Irwin, *Coming Down from Above: Prophecy, Resistance, and
    Renewal in Native American Religions* (Norman: University of
    Oklahoma Press, 2008), 7.

[^43]: Joel W. Martin, *Sacred Revolt: The Muskogees' Struggle for a New
    World* (Boston: Beacon Press, 1991), 133.

[^44]: Nabokov, *Where the Lightning Strikes*, 58--9.
