---
layout: article
title: "Review: A More Noble Cause"
author-first: Alecia P.
author-last: Long
author: Alecia P. Long
author-note: "Alecia P. Long is an associate professor of history at 
Louisiana State University."
vol: 14
year: 2012
book-reviewed: "Rachel L. Emanuel and Alexander P. Tureaud Jr. <em>A 
More Noble Cause: A.  P. Tureaud and the Struggle for Civil Rights in 
Louisiana: A Personal Biography</em>. Baton Rouge:  Louisiana State 
University Press, 2011. ISBN 978-0-8071-3793-2."
---

Rachel L. Emanuel and Alexander P. Tureaud, Jr. have joined forces to
co-author a biography of Louisiana's most notable twentieth-century
civil rights attorney, Alexander Pierre Tureaud. Their research and
recollections are supplemented by a series of oral history interviews
with the venerable attorney recorded by the late University of New
Orleans professor Joseph Logsdon.

Tureaud was born in New Orleans in 1899. As a young man he sought better
opportunities outside the Jim Crow South. He traveled first to Chicago,
then New York, before finally settling in Washington, D.C., where he
landed a civil service job as a clerk in the U.S. Department of
Justice's law library. By enrolling in evening classes, Tureaud finished
high school, took college courses, and ultimately entered Howard
University's law school where he completed his degree in 1925. At that
time, Howard had trained more than 75 percent of all African American
lawyers in the United States.

During this period Tureaud also became involved with the NAACP. Because
of his commitment to achieving racial justice and equality, Tureaud
chose to return to New Orleans in 1926. As an adult Tureaud was very
formal, referred to by his last name even by close friends and family
members. At court, he used his initials A. P. to thwart the common,
disrespectful Jim Crow practice of referring to African Americans by
their first name.

Though he worked doggedly throughout the 1930s to build a law practice,
this was not easy. Even the local NAACP chose to use white lawyers,
believing they would be more successful within the Jim Crow judicial
system. With persistence and patience, Tureaud challenged and ultimately
changed this policy. He continued to work in a federal civil service job
until 1942, when he dedicated himself to the practice of law full time.
Subsequently, Tureaud served as lead council for a dizzying number of
Louisiana civil rights cases. His legal victories helped to achieve
"integrated schools, universities, buses, parks, and public buildings"
in Louisiana (ix). He also fought long and hard to secure voting rights
and to equalize the salaries of teachers regardless of race. Tureaud
accepted cases not only in New Orleans, but also in the most rural parts
of the state where he and his plaintiffs literally risked life and limb
in the push to achieve even a modicum of social justice and de jure
racial equality.

Tureaud's story is a critically important one, especially in Louisiana
history. The authors have done a particularly good job of putting the
nuanced circumstances of his New Orleans Creole heritage into context.
In this instance, Creole is used to describe mixed-race people, often
with light skin, who were descended from informal unions of whites,
slaves, and free people of color in the colonial and antebellum periods.

Tureaud was proud of his Creole heritage and his ancestors from both
sides of the color line. He also identified with Creole activists like
the members of the Committee of Citizens who engineered and fought the
landmark case, *Plessy v. Ferguson* (1896). After the disappointing
outcome in *Plessy*, even elite, educated, and light skinned Creole
people were legally lumped in with their darker-skinned African American
counterparts. In response, four of Tureaud's own sisters left the family
and passed into the white community. Tureaud could also have crossed the
color line but he chose, instead, to identify with the Creole and Negro
communities. Later in life, Tureaud self-identified as "black" instead
of "African American," since, for him, the latter term was neither
descriptive nor accurate.

Tureaud was also initially uncomfortable with the public protests of the
1960s. Despite his misgivings, his commitment to pushing for change led
him to take the case of student activists from Southern University who
had been arrested and later expelled for sitting in at a segregated
lunch counter in Baton Rouge. Tureaud won a victory for the students in
*Garner v. Louisiana* (1961) which "was the U.S. Supreme Court's first
decision concerning lunch counter sit-ins" (240).

In their attempt to be thorough, the authors provide a welter of
specific details about Tureaud's personal life and institutional
affiliations. Some of it, like the painful inside story of A. P. Tureaud
Jr.'s experiences as the first African American undergraduate to attend
LSU, is instructive, unforgettable, and available no place else. Other
details, such as those related to Tureaud's institutional and
professional affiliations, are sometimes distracting and might better
have been consigned to footnotes.

More troubling are the significant number of historical inaccuracies in
the book. Pages four and five are riddled with errors large and small.
They include the claim that most slaves were "freed by the Emancipation
Proclamation of 1863" (4). That was not the case in Louisiana because
the Proclamation applied only to slaves in Confederate-held areas.
Another example occurs when the authors write that William Tecumseh
Sherman resigned his post at the Louisiana State Seminary of Learning
and Military Academy "to lead the Union Army" (129). Sherman ultimately
became an important Union officer, but his initial attempt to enter
service on the Union side was rejected, and he worked in private
industry for several months before entering the U.S. Army as a colonel.

The presence of so many small errors of fact is particularly troubling
in a book produced by a university press, since such manuscripts
generally receive a close and careful reading from other scholars. These
errors will distract and confound the knowledgeable reader, and make it
inadvisable to assign the book for classroom use. Sadly, such errors
will also misinform those seeking an introduction to this critically
important era in the state and nation's history

Tureaud's decades-long and sometimes dangerous commitment to change
Louisiana law and society is an important lesson to offer to young
people. All readers can learn a great deal from the lifetime of courage
and effort it took to bring about racial and social change.

This book succeeds as a loving tribute filled with the kind of detail
about Tureaud's personal and family life not available elsewhere. Errors
of fact aside, it certainly serves this purpose well, while also
complementing the standard history of civil rights in Louisiana, *Race
and Democracy* by Adam Fairclough (1999).
