---
layout: article
title: "Review: The Color of Christ"
author-first: Laurie F.
author-last: Maffly-Kipp
author: Laurie F. Maffly-Kipp
author-note: "Laurie F. Maffly-Kipp is a professor of religious studies at the
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill."
vol: 14
year: 2012
book-reviewed: "Edward J. Blum and Paul Harvey. <em>The Color of Christ: The Son of God and
the Saga of Race in America</em>. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina
Press, 2012. 281 pp. ISBN 978-0-8078-3572-2."
---

*The Color of Christ* is the latest in a number of studies in recent
years that examine how Americans have encountered Jesus. Nearly a decade
ago Stephen Prothero's *American Jesus* (2003) and Richard Wightman
Fox's *Jesus in America* (2004) mined representations of Jesus in
American history. In different ways, those studies explored the
permutations of images within a deeply religious society. But neither
focused extensively on the significance of race, and this is the gap
that *The Color of Christ* seeks to fill. Edward Blum and Paul Harvey
examine how Americans from early Euro-American contact with indigenous
peoples gave Jesus physical form, refashioning him as a symbol of their
deepest fears, hopes, terrors and dreams. Framed by the narrative of the
stained-glass Jesus shattered by the 16th Street Baptist Church bombing
in Birmingham in 1963, it is also a study deeply imbued with a
post-civil rights morality, challenging its readers to explore divine
embodiment as intrinsically linked to struggles for social and political
equality.

Working chronologically, the authors situate the American Jesus in
multiple frames, moving from the colonial era to the digital age. They
focus primary attention on white Protestant images, but also include
extensive discussion of African American, Catholic and Latter-day Saint
representations. In an expansive account, they argue that Jesus received
relatively scant notice from the Puritans and French and Spanish
Catholics, but became increasingly popular by the early national period.
Inevitably, they explain, his portrayal served as a lens into the power
of race and its increasing salience and malleability in American
society. Jesus stood up for white supremacy and challenged it; he
embraced the dictates of slavery and called for liberation. By the early
twentieth century the dominance of the Anglo-Saxon, masculine and heroic
Christ was nearly complete, and had eclipsed the cultural reach of
contending images proposed by cultural outsiders.

A major strength of this sweeping study is the plethora of evidence
provided about the qualities of Christ, from Moravian views of the
"bloody" Jesus to Phillis Wheatley's poetry to contemporary film and
even humor. The book is a tremendous resource for teachers seeking to
educate students about the myriad movements in the U.S. that have taken
Jesus' name and image, as well as general readers seeking a lively
introduction to the topic. The narrative is also admirably inclusive
both racially and confessionally, weaving a synthetic account at once
expansive and politically pointed.

Yet the issue of Christ's color is also confusing, conflating as it does
race as a social category, a phenotype, and a theological statement.
This mixed message proves confounding when discussing, for example, the
Moravian Jesus as "red" because he is represented as drenched in blood
(61). The authors conclude that "Before Jesus rose to dominance as a
white figure in America, he was red."(66) But what does this mean,
exactly? And how is it necessarily related to the issue of race? The
Jesus of enslaved Africans, even when depicted as light-skinned, is
deemed to "affirm blackness" because theologically he was thought to
have sided with the oppressed (94). This leads the authors to conclude
that the slaves "bent" whiteness in order to subvert the Euro-American
Jesus; he was still white, but with "subtle differences" (99). In
related manner, the authors use "whiteness" as a provocative category in
places where other descriptors are historically more accurate, such as
in their assessment that Samson Occom was critiquing "whiteness" when
talking about "Christian nations" (59).

The conceptual slippage, rather than making the authors' point about the
significance of race in our understandings of Christian history,
actually works against this goal, because the multiple meanings of color
are juxtaposed but never fully analyzed. What purchase do we gain on
understanding race by calling the Moravian Jesus "red" or the Jesus of
the slaves only marginally "white"? Similarly, the authors tend to use
Jesus himself---variously named as Savior, Christ, Son of God, and even
"the Cross" (166--67) as a synecdoche, a stand-in for Christianity in
its entirety. In this sense, the book prompts important insights about
the ways that race consciousness and categorization have shaped American
Christianity, yet it elides theological distinctions. A more robust
parsing of the many elements of color (and belief) under discussion
could have sharpened those notions.

The relatively loose interweaving of images, devotional life, and
political convictions as material for analysis also has both advantages
and disadvantages. Certainly, the authors emphasize (as did Fox and
Prothero) that this Jesus is ubiquitous, is not easily equated with the
creation of cultural similitude (since African Americans and Native
Americans have at times revered a "white" Jesus), and bears profound
political significance. Yet the intermixing and virtual equation of
these elements also makes for a curiously flat concept of culture,
begging some of the most critical questions: Are images of Jesus (or
anyone else) that are white in color necessarily racially white? What is
the relationship between seeing, consuming, or even worshipping an image
that is rendered as white, and a political commitment to white racial
superiority? What does it mean for the authors to note that some people
have "defended the whiteness of Jesus"? (256) All of these questions, so
central to the last thirty years of critical race theory, would have
been useful to consider in light of the documentary evidence.

Stories of the Mormon Jesus demonstrate the density of images that is
flattened (and in this case, misrepresented) by the under theorized
concept of color. The authors argue that Mormons "became some of the
most powerfully committed to Jesus' (and their own) whiteness and
strength" (136), and they base this claim on a reading of images of
Christ beginning in the early twentieth century. Yet the evidence cited
provides many more wrinkles to the narrative, including the fact that
Mormon visual images of Jesus (largely borrowed from Protestant
Europeans until the mid-twentieth century) were dismissed as inaccurate
and even foolish by some LDS because of the Teutonic qualities believers
knew to be misleading. Similarly, much is made of the large Christus
statue fixed in the LDS Temple Square Visitors' Center in 1966,
presumably (according to the authors) as a symbol of racial dominance.
No evidence supports this claim, and neither do the authors discuss the
possibility that white marble statues are, well, *white* marble. Others
may read the racial symbolism in any manner of ways, but it seems a leap
to claim that Mormons are engaged in "rhetoric-versus-image magic" (253)
because they discuss racial integration but keep a white marble Jesus in
their vestibule.

My point is not that race is unimportant. Quite the contrary.
Characterizing every sighting of Jesus' color as racially and thus
morally significant devalues the importance of race when it matters
most. And it also avoids the most interesting lines of inquiry for the
cultural historian: Is it possible for whites, in a racist society, to
portray a white Jesus that is not stamped with the oppressor's mark? Is
any representation by whites of Jesus necessarily racist? One strategy
would be to present these questions as compelling puzzles with unclear
outcomes, and highlight the ironies and disjuncture of various
portrayals. But the morally infused tone of this work sends a different,
less variegated message. Indeed, *The* *Color of Christ* is a jeremiad,
a lament for the impossibility of Christian imagery about Jesus ever to
be free of the taint of the racist society in which it is produced.
Liberation theologians, we learn, tried to free the trapped Jesus, but
even they failed to create a unifying image and fell prey to the own
"blind spots" (241). The authors seem to want to preach to us---to give
us the moral tale. But they do not quite articulate the compelling
moral, even theological, concerns that underlie their narrative.

Ultimately, the lessons of this story, other than showcasing sheer
variety of representations, are not entirely clear. What should the
reader take away, for example, from the framing narrative: the 16th
Street Baptist Church replaced its shattered white Jesus with a
dark-skinned icon. "The holy face of Christ," the authors lament, "had
to have a race." In this sense, they echo a much longer strand of
Christian moralizing. Thomas Aquinas's *Summa Theologica* states in an
expressly theological register the puzzle that animates *The Color of
Christ*: Was it fitting that God should become incarnate? In other
words, what was the point of the Divine taking bodily form? The
downsides seem so numerous: bodies are flawed, flesh is prone to
failure, and physical forms are read through temporal eyes, the eyes of
limited societies. Aquinas knew that bodies are read through culture and
history, and he argued that Jesus' body suffered that fate for a
salvific purpose. *The Color of Christ* suggests, simply, that no
matter this purpose, Christ's incarnation is a racist realization. Such
an observation must be considered alongside the accounts of believers
who have seen more in Christ than the designated color of his skin.
