---
layout: article
title: "Review: The Richmond Theater Fire"
author-first: Xaris A.
author-last: Martínez
author: Xaris A. Martínez
author-note: "Xaris A. Martínez is a Ph.D. student in history at the 
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill."
vol: 14
year: 2012
book-reviewed: " Meredith Henne Baker. <em>The Richmond Theater Fire: 
Early America's First Great Disaster</em>. Baton Rouge: Louisiana State 
University Press, 2012.  368 pp. ISBN 978-0-8071-4374-2."
---

On December 26, 1811, the Broad Street Theatre in Richmond, Virginia,
caught fire during an evening show. The actors and audience attempted to
flee the theater, only to find their egress obstructed by narrow
lobbies, winding staircases, and deficient exits. Despite heroic rescue
efforts, seventy-two people perished in the blaze, including Governor
George W. Smith and other prominent city residents. In *The Richmond
Theater Fire*, Meredith Henne Baker provides a detailed account of the
fatal evening's events and argues that the conflagration served as a
catalyst to transform the religious life and landscape of Virginia's
capital city.

Baker begins her chronological narrative by describing the social life
of the state capital. Known for its *joie de vivre*, Richmond was "an
isolated spot of urbanity" that attracted affluent people from across
the South to its entertainment venues (9). No site was more popular
among the gentry---and more criticized by evangelicals---than the city
theatre, a rare public space in which a wide array of urbanites
socialized openly. Throughout her account of the event, Baker
intersperses biographical sketches of several of the
theatergoers---white, black, rich, and poor---who attended (and
survived) the deadly flames. Her vivid and dramatic prose allows the
reader to smell the smoke in the air and hear the ensuing cries of
"Fire!" that filled the theater that evening.

Using newspaper articles and personal accounts, Baker describes the
efforts made by mourning Richmonders to make sense of the aftermath. The
local governing board immediately proclaimed a four-month moratorium on
public entertainment and appointed John Marshall, a local resident and
the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court, to help organize the
construction of a memorial monument. The first day of 1812 was set aside
as a day of fasting and prayer, providing the city's religious leaders
with an opportunity to preach about the meaning of the fire, namely,
that it was a sign of divine disfavor and an opportunity for the city's
residents to repent from the immorality that the theater had epitomized.
While the communal ritual hoped to promote religious fervor among
Richmonders, it drew attention to the city's lack of religious
resources. The state capital had only four church buildings for its
10,000 inhabitants and boasted of few charitable organizations that
could administer aid to fire victims.

Baker focuses on how this disaster particularly affected Richmond's
Protestant Episcopal congregation. Prior to the fire, which took the
lives of many of their upper-class congregants, Episcopalians worshipped
jointly with the Presbyterians, practicing a "gentle ecumenicalism"
(152). By 1812, however, the blaze, along with the election of a new
bishop and the ascendancy of evangelical enthusiasm in the area, led
congregants to adopt the anti-theater stances and dramatic preaching
style prevalent among Baptists and Methodists. This, in turn, led to a
change in the public behavior of the influential Richmonders who became
members of the new Monumental Church, built over the theater wreckage in
order to serve as a memorial site to the fire's victims and used by
local Episcopalians from 1814 to 1965.

The "newly held post-theater fire religious devotion and identity" of
Richmond's Episcopalians lent their consequent civic actions---such as
the creation of charitable organizations and the city's first Sunday
school---state-wide and even national importance (178). But while these
institutions helped to re-establish the denomination's socio-cultural
preeminence in the Commonwealth, they were not able to stave off a
subsequent decline in religious fervor among its residents. Just eight
years after the revival-bringing fire, a new theater was built in the
city and Richmond soon became known as "the entertainment capital of the
upper South" (236). Baker contends, however, that the "evangelical
period of Virginia Episcopalianism" made enduring changes to Richmond's
religious life and landscape---changes that would continue to impact the
Commonwealth well into the twentieth century (173).

Baker is at her best when describing the myriad social changes that
occurred in the wake of the theater fire. Her narrative is replete with
interesting minutiae, ranging from architectural innovations to advances
in public building safety, developments in American theater, and
improvements in medical care. However, the lack of a formal introduction
and conclusion makes it difficult to place her account in
historiographical context. This is especially noticeable when Baker
discusses the development and expansion of evangelicalism, a movement
she describes vividly but fails to analyze in-depth. This flaw does not
ultimately detract from the book's engaging and informative nature;
Baker ultimately succeeds in bringing attention to an oft-overlooked
historic event that served as "a major spiritual turning point for
Richmond" (176--77). Those interested in the religious environment of
Richmond, evangelical influences on the Episcopal Church, and the rise
of evangelicalism in the early republic will find this volume useful.
