---
layout: article
title: "Review: The Achievement of Wendell Berry"
author: Jason Peters
author-first: Jason
author-last: Peters
author-note: "Jason Peters is a professor of English at Augustana College."
vol: 14
year: 2012
book-reviewed: "Fritz Oehlschlaeger. <em>The Achievement of Wendell
Berry: The Hard History of Love</em>. Lexington: University Press 
of Kentucky, 2011. 322 pp. ISBN 978-0-8131-3007-1."
---

The most recent book-length work on Wendell Berry includes one
co-authored and two edited volumes. *Wendell Berry and the Cultivation
of Life*, by J. Matthew Bonzo and Michael R. Stevens, appeared in 2008.
*Wendell Berry and Religion*, edited by Joel James Shuman and L. Roger
Owens, followed a year later. And now, in 2012, we have what is probably
the most substantial of the three: *The Humane Vision of Wendell Berry*,
edited by Mark T. Mitchell and Nathan Schlueter.

There is sometimes a certain unevenness to such books, likely though not
inevitable, that makes Fritz Oehlschlaeger's even and even-tempered
*Achievement of Wendell Berry* a welcome addition to the growing corpus
of secondary literature on Berry---who, as the 2012 National Endowment
for the Humanities Jefferson Lecturer may at last be emerging from
neglect into his rightful position as one of America's preeminent men of
letters. Critic, biographer, novelist, poet, and essayist, Berry is, as
Ed McClanahan has written, a writer of many parts. And if in bellicose
times peaceable men may be accounted patriotic, Berry may well be, as
Bill McKibben has said, our greatest patriot.

But Professor Oehlschlaeger, to his credit, makes no such claims. *The
Achievement of Wendell Berry* is a modest but intelligent and deeply
informed book. It proceeds from the quiet sensible premises that have
been implicit in Berry's own work from the beginning: that placelessness
is corrosive to social stability, whether local or national; that
abstraction and oversimplification are devoutly to be avoided; that
liberty is better-served not by wealth but by competence in fundamental
tasks; that the desecration of nature is only the most obvious
consequence of our presiding other-worldly religion; and that one
responsibility of criticism is that it be useful---that it teach us to
learn not only about but also from our books.

Oehlschlaeger makes this point early. Just as Berry acknowledges that
there is a useful role for criticism---though he is usually distrustful
of the literary explainers---so Oehlschlaeger attempts what used to be
called a "practical criticism." To it he adds "two further precepts,"
also derived from Berry: "Part of the critic's charitable practice is to
enlarge the contexts in which a writer's work can be considered" and "to
point out directions for its further use" (5). Also to Oehlschlaeger's
credit is the fact that he makes no apologies: Berry "has given us what
we rightly expect from a writer of his stature: a serious moral vision
of life rooted in care, affection, and honesty. The critic's task is not
so much to 'explain' that vision---certainly not in any reductive
way---but to point out ways in which it might be used kindly" (8).

Anyone attempting to explain Berry's polemical work must find himself in
a very uncomfortable position. Why clarify what is already clear? Why
explain in less disciplined prose what is already perfectly intelligible
in exacting prose? Oehlschlaeger's command of Berry's thought is good
enough that he must certainly have found himself so positioned. So the
task he proposes to himself in the book's first three chapters, which
deal with Berry's essays, is to situate rather than delineate Berry's
governing themes. (Oehlschlaeger regards Berry's agrarianism, properly,
as "the implicit---and often completely explicit---context and
condition" for all that the book attempts \[6\].) Oehlschlaeger proceeds
in the first of these chapters by pointing to Berry's emphasis on the
natural limits that govern human practices and disciplines. He would
have us---after Alasdair MacIntyre---understand those disciplines in the
context of virtue and what Berry himself calls "kindly use." In the
second of these chapters Oehlschlaeger concerns himself with much of
what, in Berry's view, undermines American life: perpetual war sustained
for economic growth; a corrosive division between politics and ecology
(not to mention political discourse reduced to such useless distinctions
as "red" and "blue," which are wholly insufficient to the complexities
of civic life); the power wielded by a national policy of endless debt;
and the surrendering of self-rule by those who, unable to procure
anything except by purchase, will in consequence do anything for money.
Oehlschlaeger hears in Berry echoes of, among others, Alexis de
Tocqueville, who worried about the fate of subsidiary institutions
should democracy incline toward despotism, and also Christopher Lasch,
who saw with particular clarity the assault perpetrated against the
family by the modern planners. The value here, again, is not so much in
clarifying Berry, who does not need clarifying. The value is
Oehlschlaeger's ability to enlarge the contexts in which to consider
Berry's work. 

The third chapter is driven by a question that certainly needs
asking---and then careful answering---namely, whether or not Berry's
ideas depend "on Christianity or at least a religious view of the world"
(77). Oehlschlaeger confesses to have answered the question in class
once with "considerable equivocation" (77). And by the end of the
chapter he says, "I offer no definitive answer, only a little more
complex story" (115). But the story he offers does add up to something
like a definitive answer, and Oehlschlaeger handles it deftly. The
answer for Berry  lies in "our most important freedom": freedom from
ourselves (116). "Learning this is the lifelong work of love, the
everyday practice of resurrection in making the self a gift" (116).
Oehlschlaeger admits that he does not know "\[w\]hether self-overcoming in
self-giving is a peculiarly Christian practice," but he does claim that
"wherever such self-overcoming is practiced, there something very like
Christianity is being practiced" (116).

If that is principally an ethical pronouncement, it is not for this
reason theologically uninformed. Oehlschlaeger again enlarges the
context, situating Berry's religious thought firmly within a decidedly
anti-gnostic Trinitarian Christian orthodoxy. He rightly sees Berry's
dissatisfaction with a strand of Christianity that is merely "a
technique for individual salvation \[and\] whose language is also
available, when needed, for pious consecration of national purposes"
(89). Oehlschlaeger is especially good (as is Berry) on the problem of
religious complicity in the desecration of nature. He persuasively
argues that there is a distinctly "biblical quality" to Berry's thinking
(108). Oehleschlaeger notes the importance for Berry of the Sabbath,
both as idea and practice, and also to those passages, principally in
Isaiah, that concern right land use and ownership. All of this requires
delicacy, for Berry is not comfortable being called a religious writer;
he is, as Berry himself has said, a writer who is interested in religion
or one for whom religious concerns are important. Oehlschlaeger does not
state his case in exactly these words, but he captures their spirit. I
should add that Oehlschlaeger goes so far as to show how Berry's
thinking intersects with such documents as the papal encyclical *Humanae
Vitae* (1968) and also with such Eastern Orthodox emphases as *theosis*
and *ecstasis*. Oehlschlaeger's handling of the topic is skillful and
very broadly informed. 

The remainder of the book is devoted to Berry's fiction and poetry, with
one chapter on the short stories (the "overall arc" of which is a
movement "from hurt to charity" \[6-7\]), one on the five shorter novels
(the theme of which is memory, which receives its "fullest treatment" in
*The Memory of Old Jack* \[157\]), one on the three longer novels (stories
of "love in a time of war" \[7\]), and a final chapter on the poetry. 

The chapters on Berry's fiction constitute, in my judgment, the main
strength of this book. Except perhaps for finding a bit more seriousness
in those places where Berry appears to be going mainly for laughs (and
there are many such places in the fiction), Oehlschlaeger is carefully
attuned to the underlying charity, to the rich sense of family,
community, and place, and to the complexities and afflictions---such as
internal disaffection and external predation---that characterize the
Port William membership and that in sum compose the "hard history of
love," a phrase Oehlschlaeger borrows from "The Hurt Man" and uses as
his subtitle. He sees Berry's fiction---the long novels, especially---as
"accounts of practical peace-making" (198). They invite us "to ask
whether the nation cynically uses local fidelities for ideological
purposes quite alien to the reasons young Americans enter military
service. How legitimate is it," Oehlschlaeger asks, "to depend on the
commitment of young people to their own places on earth to wage wars for
such abstractions as the extension of democracy or free markets?" (197). 

The novels expose the dangers of a Protestantism that devalues the body.
They show us that we suffer not only because of loss but also, perhaps
especially, because of our incorrigible selves. They are governed, says
Oehlschlaeger, by a Johannine sense of love and understanding, showing
us the operations of kindness, the force of local life in work, and the
salutary nature of local memory in the old local practice of
story-telling. And, again, the context is large. Oehlschlaeger directs
our attention to the biblical narratives that underwrite much of Berry's
fiction; he also brings to bear such disparate thinkers as Hans Urs von
Balthasar, René Girard, and Søren Kierkegaard. All of this is done with
a proper respect for the perils---ranging from the uncharitable to the
tyrannical---attendant to literary criticism, of which Berry has often
voiced his suspicion. 

We await, still, a treatment of Berry's poetry that is concerned
principally with form. Oehlschlaeger's final chapter attends to the
*task* of poetry, which on Berry's account, he says, is to preserve the
particular and to uphold and remember goodness. We all know "that our
language is never fully commensurate with what it seeks to describe or
convey," Oehlschlaeger writes (238). "Our descriptions are always
abstractions from all that is, and thus the need is for responsive and
responsible ones. Keeping language responsible is an ever more difficult
task, and it is preeminently the task of poetry, as Berry sees it, to be
the last refuge of the particular" (238). And it is appropriate to a
book with the subtitle Oehlschlaeger has given his that it move toward
this: "The Word for Berry is Love, there at the beginning and the end,
standing over all, entering into all. The end for the poet, then,
paradoxically, is to arrive at a kind of speechlessness, a silence
before the Word that creates and sustains everything" (264). 

Whatever minor quibbles I have with *The Achievement of Wendell Berry*
are so small that they merit a kindred silence. This is a right-minded
and intelligent book, one likely to draw a mixed audience but aware of
this readership throughout. And it is worth noting that the Culture of
the Land series to which it belongs, edited by Norman Wirzba (Duke
University) and published by Steve Wrinn, is one of the best ongoing
projects in the current world of academic publishing.
