---
layout: article
title: "Review: The Southern Middle Class in the Long Nineteenth 
Century"
author-first: Laura Rominger
author-last: Porter
author: Laura Rominger Porter
author-note: "Laura Rominger Porter is a Ph.D. candidate in history at 
the University of Notre Dame."
vol: 14
year: 2012
book-reviewed: "Jonathan Daniel Wells and Jennifer R. Green, eds.  
<em>The Southern Middle Class in the Long Nineteenth Century</em>. Baton 
Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 2011. 313 pp. ISBN 
978-0-8071-3851-9.  "
---

*The Southern Middle Class in the Long Nineteenth Century* engages
several longstanding questions about the southern social structure that
historians have examined over the last decade. In such works as Frank
Towers' *The Urban South and the Coming of the Civil War* (2004), Frank
J. Byrne's *Becoming Bourgeois: Merchant Culture in the South,
1820--1865* (2006), the recent anthology *Southern Society and Its
Transformations, 1790--1860* (2011), and co-editor Jonathan Wells' own
*The Origins of the Southern Middle Class, 1800--1861* (2004),
historians of the American South have been reevaluating the emergence,
geographic concentration, and relative autonomy of southerners of the
middling sort. In a timely examination of these themes, the essays here
offer a portrait of social heterogeneity and conflict, geographic and
economic diversity, and steady transformation over the course of the
century---a South that, contrary to previous accounts and depending on
one's point of emphasis, was not all that unlike the free-labor North.

This anthology's most illuminating essays remain attuned to the
theoretical stakes of identifying a distinct southern middle class.
Those stakes have to do with prevailing assumptions about conditions of
middle-class formation that (theoretically) transcend time and place.
Thus, to identify a southern middle class is to claim that the southern
economy was sufficiently capitalist (or at least commercialized). It
also implies that a distinct and significant group of southerners
pursued interests in conflict with those of planter elites and that this
group went on to attain *consciousness* of those conflicting interests.
Finally, to examine the southern middle class is to say something about
its relationship to slave labor, particularly if that relationship made
the path to southern middle-class formation historically exceptional. As
the editors aptly note, the main challenge when engaging such a web of
historical issues is that of establishing an adequate definition of
"middle class" that applies to the southern social context, yet yields
useful comparisons to other cases of middle-class formation. Relying by
turns on occupation, status and cultural traits to identify the southern
middle class, the contributors productively engage the northern middle
class as a historical baseline, even as their definitions remain
flexible enough to accommodate their differences.

Combined, these essays demonstrate that middle-class southerners shared
much in common with their northern counterparts. John Deal examines the
middle class of antebellum Norfolk, Virginia, and finds participation in
benevolent societies that was typical of middle-class urban activity
outside the South. Frank Towers's analysis of secession-era antiparty
rhetoric helps to explain why middle-class southerners, although in many
ways autonomous, accepted secession even as their interests remained
distinct from those of the planter elite. And Angela Lakwete's profile
of three businessmen in the old Southwest presents a compelling case for
the southern economy's diversity beyond agricultural and manual
occupations. These historians show that the occupations, interests, and
culture of the southern middle class at least complicates notions of a
monolithic South subservient to the planter aristocracy.

At the same time, the idiosyncrasies of the slaveholding states remained
integral to southern middle-class formation. Jennifer Green argues that
early southern professionals emerged from planter families, calling into
question the typical occupational markers of southern bourgeois status.
Likewise, Susanna Delfino's examination of middle-class factory managers
and clerks suggests that antebellum industrialization was compatible
with slavery and slaveholding ideals. And, as Reece Mushal shows, if the
relations between the middle class and aristocracy were often
antagonistic, countervailing kinship networks served to mute class
divisions. If the southern middle class was indeed autonomous, these
essays raise the question of to what degree.

Yet in assessing the strength of the southern middle class, timing
remains important. Martin Ruef persuasively argues that although a
distinct middle class emerged in earnest in the late antebellum South,
it did not mature into a class "for itself" until the end of the
century. Jonathan Wells also carries the conversation beyond the Civil
War, providing a useful examination of how the southern middle class
adjusted to a postwar world that was eager to condemn their
entrepreneurial virtues in terms of Yankee materialism.

By far, however, the most provocative treatment of the theoretical
problem of a southern middle class appears in James Oakes's conclusion.
Essentially, Oakes asks if a proper middle class could have emerged from
a slave society---"a society that could not be bourgeois because it was
not capitalist" (286)---and one that (in principle) required
subservience to the slaveholding enterprise. Oakes urges historians to
transcend the false dichotomy of subordination and independence when
describing the bourgeoisie's relationship to slaveholders, particularly
by appreciating how southern slavery might have created uniquely
favorable conditions for middle-class formation. If southern society was
not technically capitalist, it was at least commercialized to such an
extent that "it is wrong to assume that a master class and the middle
class were fundamentally incompatible" (293).

Collectively, the contributors provide a welcome balance of illuminating
case studies with more synthetic and interpretive treatments of a thorny
historiographic question. With their focus on the free white men who
dominated the southern economy, however, key comparative frames remained
noticeably absent, particularly women and the African American middle
class (the sole exception being Sonya Ramsey's examination of
middle-class black women in the late-nineteenth century). Although the
essays span a range of decades and regions, the reader is left to
wonder, for instance, how ideals of domesticity compared with
middle-class northern ones, and how racial boundaries shaped the
southern middle class in distinct and perhaps exceptional ways.
Nevertheless, the anthology is a helpful introduction to how historians'
current understandings of nineteenth century southern society defy
earlier notions of homogeneity and stasis, as well as a helpful starting
point to future studies of the southern social structure.
