---
layout: article
title: "Review: The Anointed"
author: Ethan Schrum
author-first: Ethan
author-last: Schrum
author-note: "Ethan Schrum is a postdoctoral fellow at the Institute for Advanced Studies in Culture at the
University of Virginia."
vol: 14
year: 2012
book-reviewed: "Randall J. Stephens and Karl W. Giberson. <em>The
Anointed: Evangelical Truth in a Secular Age</em>.
Cambridge: The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 2011. 356 pp. ISBN 978-0-674-
04818-8."
---

In *The Anointed: Evangelical Truth in a Secular Age*, Randall J.
Stephens and Karl W. Giberson explore the sources of intellectual
authority in contemporary American evangelical Christianity. They hope
to offer an account of why evangelicals tend to follow the teachings of
certain charismatic popular leaders with limited academic
credentials---whom the authors dub "the anointed" based on the notion
that these leaders and their followers believe God has anointed them for
their roles---rather than the teachings of evangelical academics who are
respected by secular authorities in their fields.

A collaboration between a historian (Stephens) and a physicist
(Giberson), both of whom self-identify as evangelicals, *The Anointed*
begins with four case study chapters covering the subjects of human
origins, American history, family and child psychology, and eschatology.
Each chapter follows a similar pattern. After an opening vignette, the
authors present a brief background of evangelical thinking on the
chapter's topic. They then describe the ideas, methods, and influence of
a charismatic popular "anointed" leader who claims to speak with
authority on the topic, and provide a shorter treatment of a leading
evangelical scholar on the subject who has great credibility in the
academic world. The populist leaders are creationist Ken Ham, history
activist and Texas Republican politician David Barton, psychologist and
Focus on the Family founder James Dobson, and best-selling apocalyptic
authors Hal Lindsey and Tim LaHaye. The evangelical academics include
biologist and director of the National Institutes of Health Francis
Collins, historian and National Humanities Medal recipient Mark Noll,
psychologist and leading textbook author David Myers, and renowned New
Testament scholar and Anglican bishop N. T. Wright. These figures do not
all receive the same amount of attention. For example, there is a
significant and insightful description of Collins's career and ideas,
but just a brief overview of Wright's.

The case-study chapters provide interesting material about how
evangelicals construct and adopt beliefs, and will be valuable resources
for courses on contemporary American religion, evangelicalism, and
perhaps the sociology of religion. Each chapter contains nuggets that
testify to the extraordinary popular success of evangelical leaders.
Chapter 1 takes the reader on a vivid trip through the Creation Museum
in Kentucky, which receives thousands of visitors each month. Tours
conclude "at the Last Adam Theater, where visitors learn of Jesus'
sacrifice and receive a call to repent of their sins" (25). The authors
describe the development of the intellectual framework that shaped the
museum, including the work of Ham and his organization Answers in
Genesis. Chapter 2 on amateur Christian historians is most insightful
when it sets David Barton's work in the context of the astounding
earlier success of *The Light and the Glory*, a 1977 book by Peter
Marshall and David Manuel that purported to chronicle God's work in
American history and sold almost a million copies. In chapter 3, the
authors do well to highlight the importance of a now little-known work,
*The Christian Family* (1970) by Lutheran pastor Larry Christenson,
which sold two million copies and became "the manual for conservative
Christian families" (106). The book's best material is in chapter 4,
where we get a helpful mini-biography of Hal Lindsey and an astute
contextual analysis of how the rise of a Christian publishing subculture
in the 1970s fueled the popularity of Lindsey's works, especially the
apocalyptic thriller *The Late Great Planet Earth* (1970), which had
sold an astonishing twenty-eight million copies by the early 1990s. The
United States had 725 Christian bookstores in 1965 and 1,850 in 1975,
and "sales of Christian books climbed over 112 percent from 1972 to
1977" (158). Lindsey proffered ideas about Armageddon, and the authors
suggest that Ronald Reagan's public discussion during his presidency
about how possibilities for Armageddon might affect foreign policy
indicated just how much influence Lindsey and his ilk exerted on
American life.

A prominent theme that cuts across the case studies is that many of the
phenomena the authors highlight began or intensified in the wake of the
turbulent 1960s. *The Late Great Planet Earth*, *The Christian Family*,
and Dobson's *Dare to Discipline* all appeared in 1970, the latter works
indicating that questions about family matters "seemed urgent after the
alarming 1960s assault on traditional values" (102). *The Light and the
Glory* came a few years later, aiming at "restoring optimism to a nation
crippled by doubts and fears" (75). Curiously, the authors do not
develop this point further or engage the historiography, missing a
chance to make a larger contribution to scholarship on recent U.S.
history.

The last two chapters deviate from the case-study pattern. Chapter 5,
which seems largely superfluous, describes the institutions of the
parallel culture of evangelicalism by following the life of one
evangelical from childhood through mid-20s. Chapter 6, however, is where
the real action is. Here the authors present their explanation for "what
confluence of factors empowers \[the anointed leaders\] to rise to
national prominence until they wield intellectual authority over tens of
millions of people? What winds carry them so comfortably past their
credentialed and mainstream evangelical colleagues? . . . What draws
followers---often well educated, sometimes with doctorates, employed in
mainstream professions, raising wholesome families---to them?" (234).

Many of the answers are predictable: they cite characteristics of
American culture and especially evangelicalism---such as
anti-intellectualism, populism, and a religious free market. Stephens
and Giberson also discuss strategies invoked by the anointed
themselves---such as claiming endorsement by God or that they are
countering threats from Satan. One, however, merits closer attention. In
the book's most notable attempt at innovation, the authors argue that
the anointed use in-group and out-group dynamics to gain authority.
In-group dynamics occurs when "people begin to think of themselves as
part of a *movement*, inspired by a leader" (237). Out-group dynamics,
by contrast, functions by creating an enemy (out-group) that helps unite
groups that would normally be rivals in a common cause against the
out-group. Drawing heavily on Yale law professor Dan Kahan's account of
cultural cognition, the authors coin "cue-based epistemology" to
describe the process by which in-group dynamics influence belief and
trump conventional expertise (245). They conclude that "by effectively
exploiting cultural cues, evangelical leaders resonate with their
audiences and quickly become insiders---members of the tribe" (248--
49). The authors place cue-based epistemology in the larger framework of
sociobiology and evolutionary psychology, claiming that cultural cues
and our need to have a group identity and embrace leaders we can trust
"are deeply rooted in our genes" (249).

Despite these efforts to explain intellectual authority, *The Anointed*
will likely disappoint historians looking for a contribution to
scholarship on expertise. Many historians will be unsatisfied with the
extent to which the explanation is based on social science theory rather

than analysis of historical evidence. Bracketing the explanatory
framework in a separate chapter does not help matters. The authors
briefly raise the issue of trust in conjunction with cue-based
epistemology, but they do not engage the substantial and important
literature on trust that has arisen in the history of science and
related fields in recent decades, as for example in the writing of
Theodore Porter and Steven Shapin.[^1] This literature insists that
assent to scientific knowledge and methodology does not arise
self-evidently but rather is mediated by sociocultural processes, which
suggests examination of the rhetorical, institutional, and interpersonal
strategies that scientists employ to gain trust and credibility.
Stephens and Giberson also do not explain how their work relates to the
scholarly literature in fields like sociology and history on in-group
and out-group dynamics or the authority of experts in American society.

The authors also miss the opportunity to connect their discussion with
moments in American history where credentialed secular expertise has
been a serious problem for public policy. In the nineteenth century,
early proponents of the human sciences offered expert knowledge about
racial and sexual differences that bolstered efforts to marginalize
women and racial minorities. In the early twentieth century, several
presidents of elite universities, who were widely regarded as
progressive experts, endorsed eugenics. During the 1960s, a near cult of
technocratic expertise surrounded Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara,
but with disastrous results in Vietnam. These historical examples
complicate a picture viewed simplistically as credentialed reliability
versus populist irresponsibility.

One reason for some of these difficulties is that the authors have two
goals that sometimes interfere with each other. On one hand, they want
to assess how the anointed leaders have such intellectual authority
among evangelicals despite their lack of scholarly qualifications. On
the other hand, the authors want to condemn the views of the anointed
and endorse the positions of the evangelical academics. Too often, the
authors' enthusiasm for the second goal inhibits their pursuit of the
first. *The Anointed* is certainly not a dispassionate work of
scholarship. It is a critique of the ideas espoused by the anointed. In
fact, Giberson has personally participated in some of the issues
mentioned in the book. The authors quote Ham from a debate on
beliefnet.com, but fail to mention that Giberson was the opponent. They
describe how Collins set up the BioLogos Foundation "to counter the
antiscience message of the creationists," but do not indicate that
Giberson became BioLogos's executive vice president for a time and wrote
a book with Collins under its auspices (9). *The Anointed* thus raises
important questions about the relationship of scholarship and advocacy.

*The Anointed* seems to be written for a general audience, and it mostly
consists of fluid prose that should endear it to general readers despite
its length. There are drawbacks, however, to the snappy style and
quick-moving stories. One such drawback is a tendency to
oversimplification, particularly in describing views on human origins.
The authors' language at times implies that everyone is either a
young-earth creationist or a full-blown ateleological evolutionist,
whereas in fact many evangelicals are somewhere in between. Too often
they say things like Francis Collins "believes in evolution" without
specifying what kind of evolution Collins affirms or how he thinks God
might be related to evolution (55). Another drawback of the writing
style is that it sometimes gives a patronizing tone to the descriptions
of the anointed, perhaps to make the account more vivid. Despite these
flaws, *The Anointed* makes an important contribution by prompting us to
consider how human beings determine their beliefs on some of the most
important questions in life.

[^1]: Theodore M. Porter, *Trust in Numbers: The Pursuit of Objectivity
    in Science and Public Life* (Princeton: Princeton University Press,
    1995). Among many works by Shapin see most recently *The Scientific
    Life: A Moral History of a Late Modern Vocation* (Chicago:
    University of Chicago Press, 2008) and *Never Pure: Historical
    Studies of Science as if It Was Produced by People with Bodies,
    Situated in Time, Space, Culture, and Society, and Struggling for
    Credibility and Authority* (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University
    Press, 2010).
