---
layout: article
title: "Review: God-Fearing and Free"
author-first: Matthew Avery
author-last: Sutton
author: Matthew Avery Sutton
author-note: "Matthew Avery Sutton is an associate professor of history 
at Washington State University."
vol: 14
year: 2012
book-reviewed: "Jason W. Stevens. <em>God-Fearing and Free: A Spiritual 
History of America's Cold War</em>. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University 
Press, 2010. 448 pp. ISBN 978-0-674-05555-1."
---

The 9/11 attacks on the United States and the ensuing "war on terror"
has forced Americans to once again wrestle with the relationships
between their military ventures and their public expressions of faith.
It has also pushed scholars to think more deeply about the ways in which
the United States has employed religion in past conflicts. In
particular, scholars have been thoroughly reassessing the role of
religion during the Cold War. Angela Lahr's *Millennial Dreams and
Apocalyptic Nightmares: The Cold War Origins of Political
Evangelicalism* (2007) focuses on the ways in which evangelicals'
doomsday scenarios fueled Cold War ideology; William Inboden's *Religion
and American Foreign Policy, 1945--1960: The Soul of Containment* (2010)
analyzes the impact of Christianity on Truman and Eisenhower's foreign
policy; and Jonathan P. Herzog's *The Spiritual-Industrial Complex:
America's Religious Battle Against Communism in the Early Cold War*
(2011) shows how Americans framed the fight against communism in
religious terms.

The story of the United States' pervasive deployment of religion in the
Cold War is told again by Jason W. Stevens in his excellent *God-Fearing
and Free*. He argues that in the two decades after World War II, "The
American public, powered by a national religious revival, was
purposefully disillusioned regarding the country's mythical innocence
and thus fortified for an epochal struggle with totalitarianism" and
that "Americans represented both private and public life through a
language of iniquity, guilt, and expiation that intentionally echoed the
nation's past religious awakenings" (vii). During this period,
influential Americans sought to bury the theological modernism of the
progressive era that had aimed to correlate "Christianity with the
progressive elements in American society" (4). "Protestant
countermodernists," he explains, "(ranging from the neoorthodox to
self-critical liberals to fundamentalists) argued that Christianity
should testify against the world instead of accommodating it; Christians
should recover the God of Judgment who stands over culture rather than
pretend to find God in some dialectic of progress" (6). These
countermodernists gave Americans a language with which to acknowledge
their loss of innocence and then justify their actions in the Cold War.

To make these arguments, Stevens breaks his book into five sections of
two chapters each. Each section takes a unique approach to interpreting
the ways in which religion intersects with the Cold War. The first
focuses on the ideas articulated by the nation's most prominent
theologians. Stevens sees numerous parallels between two major figures
who have in the past been most often treated as opposites---Billy Graham
and Reinhold Niebuhr. Similar to Andrew Finstuen's recent *Original Sin
and Everyday Protestants: The Theology of Reinhold Niebuhr, Billy
Graham, and Paul Tillich in an Age of Anxiety* (2009), Stevens shows how
Niebuhr and Graham's emphasis on sin helped frame Cold War ideas about
national innocence and naivety. The second section of the book examines
the ways in which Americans dealt with guilt. Here Stevens offers a
thoughtful analysis of sources ranging from former
communist-turned-conservative Whittaker Chambers' bestselling memoir
*Witness* (1952) to McCarthyism as it was expressed and critiqued
through film noir. The third section focuses on Americans' struggles
over mass culture and consumption. Here Stevens explores such sources as
the play *Inherit the Wind* (1955) and then academic critiques of mass
evangelism. The next section interrogates the integration of popular
psychology and psychoanalysis with religion. Paul Tillich and Shirley
Jackson serve as two of the many sources Stevens invokes in this
discussion of Cold-War era therapeutic faith. The final section explores
the work of "prophets" ranging from Flannery O'Connor to James Baldwin
as they critiqued the United States' Cold War strategies.

Ultimately, Stevens demonstrates how Americans' acknowledgment of the
nation's loss of innocence in some ways made it easier to justify
increasingly greater evils. Stevens concludes by applying his argument
to the present: "In light of recent events" he writes, "we may take
Jesus' provocation---*ye are liars, and the truth is not in you!*---to
tell us not simply to shed our innocence, but to put an end to ending
our innocence. We must stop what has become a national ritual that
functions as self-acquittal through self-accusation" (310).

One of the strengths of *God-Fearing and Free* is the wide-range of
sources that Stevens uses to shape his argument, as well as the
interdisciplinary approach he takes to understanding those sources. An
English professor, Stevens draws on his own discipline as well as
history and cultural studies to build his narrative. It is not often
that an author can move comfortably from Whittaker Chambers to *Night of
the Hunter* (1955) to Billy Graham to *The Haunting of Hill House*
(1959).

*God-Fearing and Free* is not a quick or easy read. It is an ambitious
book that makes an ambitious argument. Although Stevens (and/or his
editor) could have worked a little harder to reduce the jargon and make
the text more readable, it is still well-worth the challenge. In sum,
Stevens has written an important book that adds a new and significant
dimension to a story that has important ramifications for American life
today.
