---
layout: article
title: "Review: God's Right Hand"
author-first: David R.
author-last: Swartz
author: David R. Swartz
author-note: "David R. Swartz is an assistant professor of history at Asbury 
University."
vol: 14
year: 2012
book-reviewed: "Michael Sean Winters. <em>God's Right Hand: How Jerry 
Falwell Made God a Republican and Baptized the American Right</em>. New 
York: HarperOne, 2012. 448 pp. ISBN 978-0-06-197067-2."
---

In 1980 Ronald Reagan told 18,000 conservative evangelical ministers in
Dallas, "I want you to know that I endorse you and what you are doing."
After decades of cultural exile, according to Michael Sean Winters,
conservative evangelicals were receiving a blessing from a serious
presidential candidate. In this page-turning biography, Winters argues
that Jerry Falwell, founder of the Moral Majority, was the pivotal
figure who brought social conservatism onto the national stage and
launched the culture wars.

The narrative is familiar to students of American religious history.
Falwell was a driven religious entrepreneur who founded Thomas Road
Baptist Church, where he preached salvation and fulminated against
encroaching secularism, federal government, and global communism. He
established a Christian day school in the 1960s, launched Liberty
University in the 1970s, and began to preach a conservative political
gospel in the 1980s. Despite Falwell's devotion to Reagan, the president
failed to deliver, and Falwell himself made a series of missteps in the
1980s. As his ministries careened between infusions of cash and
insolvency, Falwell overreached, and his infelicitous language provoked
a backlash from moderates.

But Falwell was more than a political operative. He was a sinner,
according to his own spiritual narrative, a southern hooligan in need of
Jesus. His conversion ensconced him in an all-encompassing
fundamentalist world. After graduation from Baptist Bible College in
Missouri, he became a preacher of the gospel, a calling that always
superseded his political adventures. In fact, Winters shows that the
vast majority of his sermons dealt with scripture, not politics. Despite
a vituperative streak, he could also be gracious. He formed unlikely
friendships with *Hustler's* Larry Flynt and liberal Democrat Edward
Kennedy. A devoted family man, Falwell never suffered a hint of personal
scandal. Even as Winters clinically recounts a multitude of horrifying
remarks about racial integration in South Africa and the American South,
he humanizes Falwell with telling anecdotes and descriptions of Thomas
Road's numerous ministries of compassion.

Winters locates Falwell ecclesiastically and culturally as a
fundamentalist. As a mid-century independent Baptist, he inhabited a
separatist world. While this separatism eventually transformed into
combative engagement, his basic views of homosexuality, government
intrusion, abortion, support for Israel, and American superpatriotism
did not change. As the decades passed, Falwell's genius was revealed in
his ability to invert certain fundamentalist methodologies, even while
maintaining moral certitude on these issues. From cultural critic
Francis Schaeffer, Falwell learned the strategy of cobelligerancy.
Abandoning long-standing separatist tendencies, he linked fundamentalist
networks with Catholics, Jews, and Mormons. Even as he practiced a
nostalgic trope of national declension, he co-opted the methods of
modern advertising. Falwell's use of radio, television, and direct mail
filled his coffers and expanded his empire beyond mega-church status.
Finally, having preached the infamous 1964 "Ministers and Marches"
sermon, which defended segregation by denouncing political activism, he
turned many apolitical fundamentalists into political activists.

This account of Falwell's transformations is both convincing and
eminently readable, but it is not an original piece of scholarship. The
paucity of archival sources is conspicuous, and Winters heavily depends
on his subject's own published accounts. Winters exaggerates Falwell's
significance, both as a driver and a representative figure of
evangelical politicization. To be sure, the founder of the Moral
Majority was an important figure in the resurgence of American
conservatism. But Winters' repeated claims that Falwell was "the face of
American Christianity" and the architect of the mega-church movement are
overplayed. Moreover, there is little recognition of the many varieties
of evangelical politicization: Prohibition activists of the early
twentieth century, Okie populists who lifted Barry Goldwater to the
Republican nomination in 1964 and Reagan to the governorship of
California in 1970, and the evangelical left of the 1970s. Winters does
not acknowledge these important antecedents to the 1980s iteration of
the religious right.

Those looking for a fine-grained, archives-driven cultural analysis of
this important figure will have to turn to Susan Harding's *The Book of
Jerry Falwell* (2001). But this fascinating and lively narrative
portrait of Falwell, the first comprehensive biography of this important
figure, contributes significantly to the literature of American
religious history.
