---
layout: article
title: "Review: Ministers and Masters"
author-first: Jennifer L.
author-last: Woodruff
author: Jennifer L. Woodruff
author-note: "Jennifer L. Woodruff Tait is an adjunct professor of 
church history at Asbury Theological Seminary."
vol: 14
year: 2012
book-reviewed: "Charity R. Carney. <em>Ministers and Masters: Methodism, 
Manhood, and Honor in the Old South</em>. Baton Rouge: Louisiana State 
University Press, 2011. 188 pp. ISBN-13 978-0-8071-3886-1."

---

Both insiders and outsiders have noted the many contradictions in the
study of American Methodism as a social movement. Not the least is the
contradiction that a denomination so opposed in its early days to
slavery---and so committed, if awkwardly, to spiritual equality of the
races---accommodated itself over time so completely to southern
slaveholding society. This important new book by Charity Carney goes a
long way toward explaining this contradiction by shedding light on the
complicated interplay of religion, masculinity, and honor..

As Carney notes, Methodism's "recognition of the equality of souls" led
ministers "to craft a new type of patriarchy in the South---a Methodist
patriarchy that both preserved and undermined the social hierarchy" and
"transformed the meaning of masculinity for ministers," to whom
traditional arenas of masculine honor-gaining were off limits (5). At
the same time Methodist ministers were transforming southern patriarchy,
though, they were also becoming southern patriarchs, even if it was with
a twist. "Methodist ministers," Carney elaborates, "could never be
typical southern men; their profession simply prevented it. But they
could take on vestiges of southern manhood and become patriarchs in
their own right. The story of the creation of Methodist masculinity
offers insight into the pervasiveness of southern patriarchal ideals and
the resilience of evangelical notions of spiritual equality. These two
forces met in southern Methodism and produced a new type of religious
standard separate from but deeply connected to conventional social
practices" (9).

Carney presents an overall picture of what ideal Methodist manhood
looked like and how it was maintained. Methodists were enjoined by their
governing text of church law, the *Discipline*, to "avoid the worldly
(and typically masculine) habits of 'laying up treasure upon earth'
through seeking fortune or fame, 'fighting, quarrelling, brawling,'
'drinking spirituous liquors,' and 'taking such diversions as cannot be
used in the name of the Lord Jesus,' like politicking, frivolous
socializing, dancing, and gambling" (13). Methodist preachers more often
found themselves the subject of violence than the perpetrators of it,
and gained a certain kind of honor in enduring it patiently. Yet they
forcefully articulated their worldview in newspapers and sermons.
Preachers also created a brotherhood of compatriot clergy through the
deeply connectional nature of Methodist polity, while also transforming
places like taverns into arenas of evangelism

Carney looks at four ways in which Methodism both developed and
undermined patriarchy and hierarchy: denominational organization,
marriage, child-rearing, and relationships with slaves. Through the
"patriarchy of the pulpit" southern Methodist ministers understood
themselves as part of a strongly hierarchical connection, subject to the
will of bishop and presiding elder, continually following the models set
forth by older and wiser clergy on higher rungs of the ecclesiastical
ladder. They repeatedly rejected various agitations for more democratic
reforms. It was therefore a patriarchy "centered on spiritual fatherhood
rather than temporal mastery" (64).

In the other three arenas, though, the triumph of patriarchy was less
sure. The relatively impoverished life of constant travel led by
Methodist preachers meant that it was impossible for them to fulfill
expected cultural norms as family providers. "Southerners expected
patriarchs to provide for and protect their families and to establish an
estate and a reputation in their community that could be passed on to
the next generation" (90). Instead, preachers' households "emphasized
spiritual health over temporal needs and religious authority over
patriarchal power" as itinerants depended on their wives to be in charge
of family matters---financial, legal, and spiritual---for months at a
time and their church communities to provide the basic necessities of
life (90). Furthermore, while paying outward homage to the structures of
southern society, Methodist rhetoric "created an inverted hierarchy in
which young Christians proved their own spiritual authority over that of
their parents," and in which "at times, ministers took their message of
spiritual equality even further and included slaves (the lowest members
of society) in stories that condemned southern patriarchs for their
spiritual blindness" (112). In the end, "Methodist writers crafted a
complex dialogue that questioned the ultimate power of southern
patriarchs while presenting the patriarch as vital to social and
religious order" (141).

Many treatments of Methodism have tended to focus on its northern
branches (with the notable exception of works by Cynthia Lynn Lyerly and
Christine Leigh Heyrman), and this book provides a welcome "thick"
description of southern Methodism---its ethos, its self-understanding,
and its cultural adaptations. But it is not only of value to scholars of
Methodism. It nuances our understanding of southern patriarchy and the
ways in which that patriarchy could be questioned. It gives a window
into how the roles of women and children functioned in southern society.
And it implicitly asks broader questions about the place of religion in
a slave-holding society---especially a religion which began with a
biracial vision. It is recommended reading for all who wish for insight
into those issues.
