---
layout: article
title: "Review: Albert Taylor Bledsoe"
author-first: Lucas
author-last: Volkman
author: Lucas Volkman
author-note: "Lucas Volkman is a Ph.D. candidate in history at the 
University of Missouri."
vol: 14
year: 2012
book-reviewed: "Terry A. Barnhart. <em>Albert Taylor Bledsoe: Defender 
of the Old South and Architect of the Lost Cause</em>. Baton Rouge: 
Louisiana State University Press, 2011. 270 pp. ISBN 978-0-8071-3724-6."
---

Historians Eugene Genovese, David W. Blight, and Charles Reagan Wilson,
among others, have ranked Albert Taylor Bledsoe as one of the leading
theorists of southern nationalism before and after the Civil War. Until
the appearance of Terry Barnhart's excellent and comprehensive biography
on Bledsoe, however, there has been no book-length profile of this
important figure. He was an eminent defender of slavery and states'
rights before the war. After its conclusion, Bledsoe was a leading
"architect of the Confederate interpretation of the conflict" (6). He
began articulating the Lost Cause ideology, while retroactively
justifying secession in light of southern defeat. Religious historians
will find Bledsoe's own religious story interesting. He was an Episcopal
priest who became a Methodist minister later in life. However, while he
is known for his ministerial career and his involvement in the critical
theological controversies of the day, Bledsoe also held a number of
other vocations in his life. Born in Kentucky, a graduate of West Point,
a member of the Springfield, Illinois, bar with Abraham Lincoln before
relocating to the South, Bledsoe was also a mathematician, teacher,
editor, and Confederate official during his varied career.

The book is organized chronologically, but it also incorporates chapters
exploring Bledsoe's theological and political writings. Barnhart
adequately details Bledsoe's overall impact in his time, as well as how
scholars have characterized his work.. The author does an excellent job
discussing Bledsoe's 1856 *An Essay on Liberty and Slavery*, as well as
one of the first postwar treatises defending the right of secession, *Is
Davis A Traitor?* (1866)---which became a springboard to his editorship
of the *Southern Review*. Bledsoe eventually aligned that periodical
with the Methodist Episcopal Church, South. But, while Barnhart's prose
is generally sound, there are several instances where he seems to focus
a bit too heavily on secondary sources and their assessment of Bledsoe,
especially numerous direct quotations from them that distract from the
overall flow of his arguments.

One of the more interesting aspects of the book is chapter four, which
examines Bledsoe's metaphysical and theological ideas. While Barnhart
explains that Bledsoe wrote on these subjects throughout his life,
Barnhart situates the chapter within the larger description of his
antebellum corpus. It was during this time that he wrote two of his most
important works, *An Examination of President Edwards' Inquiry into the
Freedom of the Will* (1845) and *A Theodicy; Or, Vindication of the
Divine Glory* (1853). The central theme in this chapter, which is also
successfully weaved throughout the book, is Bledsoe's
Arminian-influenced philosophy of free will. Barnhart proves that
Bledsoe's "works were original, learned, and well-argued treatises that
earned him something of a following among advocates of free will who
shared his disdain of Calvinism" (57). But these writings were not
received without controversy in Calvinist circles, as Barnhart
demonstrates. As with other parts of the book, Barnhart effectively
summarizes Bledsoe's work, and the broader reception to it.

Barnhart admits that there are gaps in his biography, which stem from
limited sources. "Writing a biography of Bledsoe is a challenging
endeavor because so few of his personal papers have survived" (211).
Fortunately, Barnhart provides an informative five-page essay on the
sources that he does utilize. Bledsoe deplored writing letters, and much
of his correspondence before 1860 was lost. At the same time, several
family members saved correspondence. *Washington Post* columnist David
Rankin Barbee, moreover, compiled a multitude of materials in the middle
of the twentieth century in anticipation of an unwritten biography on
Bledsoe. Along with these sources, Bledsoe's numerous writings and work,
especially in the *Southern Review*, form the core of Barnhart's
sources, which are masterfully employed throughout his book.
