---
layout: article
title: "Reflections on <em>Fight Against Fear: Southern Jews and Black Civil Rights</em>"
author: "Clive Webb"
author-first: Clive
author-last: Webb
author-note: "Clive Webb is Professor of Modern American History at the University of Sussex."
vol: 14
year: 2012
---

In 1992, the *Journal of American History* published an article by
University of Cambridge historian Tony Badger titled "Confessions of a
British Americanist." Badger reflected on an important methodological
conundrum that confronts overseas historians of the United States: is
their outsider status an asset or a hindrance to their scholarship? For
some Americanists based outside the United States, the answer was that
it could be a virtue since they bring a dispassionate eye to their
subject that affords new analytical perspectives. Yet other foreign
scholars, including Badger himself, took the opposing view. These
historians believed that for their scholarship to be taken seriously in
the United States they must go native, making themselves
indistinguishable from home-grown academics. This approach necessitated
extended travel to and within the United States to allow their immersion
in archival sources. The result, they hoped, would be research that
American readers would appreciate on its own terms rather than
prejudging on the basis of the author's national origin.[^1]

I had reason to reflect on these issues when I arrived at the University
of Cambridge in October 1992 to research a doctoral thesis under the
supervision of Professor Badger. His article was one of the earliest
pieces I read. I had not in all honesty pondered the dilemmas of being a
British Americanist when embarking on my research. To some extent this
owed to my being unable to conceive of a readership that consisted of
more than my supervisor and examiners. It was not clear to me at the
outset of my research that I wanted to pursue an academic career so the
notion of publishing a revised version of the thesis in book form did
not occur to me. My only ambition was naively to recreate the events I
described in something approximating their historical reality.
(Unsophisticated as I was, even I balked at the idea of establishing
"the truth.") Even when I did start amending the thesis for publication,
my main anxiety about not being American was learning how to spell (or,
as some on this side of the Atlantic would mischievously assert,
misspell) and punctuate differently. Although it is sometimes claimed
that British scholars are attracted to American history because it
allows them to study an experience different from their own without
having to learn another language, experience has sometimes taught me
otherwise.

The book based on my thesis, *Fight Against Fear: Southern Jews and
Black Civil Rights* (University of Georgia Press, 2001), demonstrates
both the strengths and the shortcomings of foreign scholarship on
American history. Although I do not believe it is possible to be
entirely objective, my status as a white English Gentile provided me
with a relatively impartial standpoint. I had no interest in acting as
an apologist for southern Jews but sought to explain the broader
societal forces that shaped their action or, as was often the case,
inaction during the civil rights struggle. Nor did the contemporary
tensions between the Jewish and African American communities have any
influence on my reading of their historical relationship. Yet to some
critics this detachment also rendered me unable or unwilling to make a
tougher moral judgment of the historical actors I studied. As one
reviewer of the manuscript advised, what it needed was "more piss and
vinegar."

What some reviewers saw as fence straddling was to me sympathy for human
frailty. The central argument of *Fight Against Fear* is that a history
of anti-Semitic persecution around the world sensitized many southern
Jews to the plight of African Americans oppressed by Jim Crow. In the
oppressive political climate of the South, it was nonetheless difficult
for them to express public support for desegregation. Southern white
opposition to civil rights reform, what became known as "massive
resistance," was a combustible compound of elements that included
racism, violence, patriarchy, and a substantial measure of
anti-Semitism. Confronted by the threat of physical reprisal, social
ostracism, and economic boycott of their businesses, most Jews kept
their heads below the parapet during the civil rights conflict. A few
critics believed I should have been bolder in condemning Jews for not
being brave enough to answer the call of their consciences. By contrast,
I interpreted the paralysis of such men and women as all too
understandable.

Other reviewers challenged my interpretation with an alternate thesis
that the failure of Jews to support black civil rights stemmed from
their acculturation into white southern society. Prejudice, they argued,
not fear motivated their conduct. The book does in fact embrace this
interpretation. It included a controversial chapter on Jews who were in
the front ranks of massive resistance including states' rights legal
strategist Charles Bloch, South Carolina politician Solomon Blatt, and
Sol Tepper, one of the possemen who brutally assaulted civil rights
marchers on the Edmund Pettus Bridge in Selma. Had I known more about
him at the time, I would have added another profile to this rogues'
gallery, that of lawyer Will Gerber, a member of Boss Crump's Memphis
political machine who represented school boards resisting the admission
of African American students.

These Jewish segregationists were nonetheless exceptional personalities.
Although Jews joined segregationist organizations such as the Citizens'
Council, it was more often under duress. While historians such as David
Chappell and Jane Dailey have debated the extent to which southern
Christians drew on biblical doctrine to support segregation, I uncovered
no evidence of rabbis who used their pulpits to propagate racist
doctrine or of laypersons who espoused a Jewish equivalent of the
"segregationist folk theology" described by Paul Harvey.[^2]

Another way to approach this debate might be to ask a counterfactual
question. To what extent would Jews have taken an initiative in
encouraging civil rights reform if less constrained by political
circumstances? Answering this question would allow us to determine
whether southern Jews were ideologically more committed to segregation
or integration. The reality, however, is that we will never know. What
is nonetheless evident is that in those communities where white racial
attitudes were not monolithic, Jews often tended toward moderate or
progressive opinion. Moreover, in the most reactionary political cities
there were Jews prepared to take serious personal risks to support
reform, most conspicuously rabbis such as Perry Nussbaum of Jackson,
Mississippi, whose home and synagogue were bombed by Klansmen. Jewish
women also made an important contribution to facilitating school
desegregation through their active involvement in numerous community
organizations.

One of the harshest critics I have always contended with is myself.
Although none of the reviews of the book raised the issue, in retrospect
I wonder whether *Fight Against Fear* falls into the trap of
constructing a simplistic dichotomy between the conservative South and
the progressive North. One of the book's chapters focuses on the clash
between southern Jews and their liberal coreligionists who travelled
below the Mason-Dixon line to participate in civil rights demonstrations
and voter registration drives. Some southern Jews opposed the incursion
of these outsiders into their communities on ideological grounds. Others
feared more practically that their presence would provide political
ammunition to anti-Semites within the ranks of massive resistance, who
accused all Jews of fomenting racial agitation. In either case, southern
Jews often tried to dissuade northern activists from intervening in
local conflicts; failing that, they publicly dissociated from them. What
I did not consider was the extent to which the northern activists
commanded the support of their own congregations back home. Although
their contested presence in Dixie raised the issue of sectional
divisions between Jews, it remains uncertain whether the liberal racial
politics of the campaigners were representative even of their fellow
northerners. Northern Jews performed an important role at the
organizational level in promoting civil rights but further research is
needed to dig to the grassroots to determine the depth and breadth of
community support for racial reform.

*Fight Against Fear* covers a regionwide canvas that contains many
points of detail but still necessarily relies on broad brushstrokes.
Although I travelled to more than twenty archives in ten different
states (as someone who has never learned to drive, the vagaries of
American public transport was one of my severest culture shocks), there
are large areas of the South, especially the border-states, which
receive little or no mention. Other scholars have filled in some of
these lacunae, most notably Raymond Mohl, Leonard Rogoff, and Bryan
Stone, who have respectively produced studies of Miami, North Carolina
and Texas.[^3]

One development that has not occurred during the last decade is the
integration of the southern Jewish experience into the narrative of the
civil rights movement. The desegregation crisis unleashed a torrent of
prejudice against Jews who were accused of secretly financing and
strategizing civil rights activism. A series of terrorist attacks on
Jewish institutions, culminating with the dynamiting of the Atlanta
Reform Temple, influenced passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1960,
which, among other provisions, authorized federal investigation of white
supremacist bombings. These events may be peripheral to the black
freedom struggle, but their omission from much of the new scholarship on
white resistance to civil rights reform is disappointing. With the
exception most notably of Karen S. Anderson's superb study of the Little
Rock school crisis, the history of southern Jews remains below the
radars of most civil rights historians.[^4] I tried to address this
issue in a sequel of sorts to *Fight Against Fear*. *Rabble Rousers: The
American Far Right in the Civil Rights Era* (2010) focuses on militant
segregationists who claimed the African American freedom struggle was a
conspiracy masterminded by communist Jews to destroy the social fabric
of the United States.[^5]

What also still needs to be done is for someone to produce a comparative
analysis of religious minorities' response to the civil rights movement
that would allow us to see what, if anything, was exceptional about
southern Jews. We now have important works on other non-Protestant
groups including Andrew Moore's study of Catholics, *The South's
Tolerable Alien* (2007), that demonstrate points of convergence with and
divergence from the southern Jewish experience.[^6] I confess, however,
that I look forward to one day reading rather than writing such a
multi-faith study of religion and race. Now that I myself am a
supervisor of doctoral students, what advice would I offer to an
enthusiastic postgraduate who wanted to undertake a project of this
kind, other than honoring academic tradition by trying to dissuade them
from being too ambitious? In response to the issues raised by my own
supervisor twenty years ago, I would encourage a student to build their
analysis on a strong empirical foundation and hope that in rooting
through the archives their foreign identity would lead them to
interrogate the material in new and unusual ways.

[^1]: Tony Badger, "Confessions of a British Americanist," *Journal of
    American History* 79 (Sept. 1992): 515--23.

[^2]: Jane Dailey, "Sex, Segregation, and the Sacred After Brown,"
    *Journal of American History* 91 (June 2004): 119--44; David L.
    Chappell, *A Stone of Hope: Prophetic Religion and the Death of Jim
    Crow* (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2004); Paul
    Harvey, *Freedom's Coming: Religious Culture and the Shaping of the
    South from the Civil War through the Civil Rights Era* (Chapel Hill:
    University of North Carolina Press, 2005).

[^3]: Raymond A. Mohl with Matilda "Bobbi" Graff and Shirley M. Zoloth,
    *South of the South: Jewish Activists and the Civil Rights Movement
    in Miami, 1945--1960* (Gainesville: University Press of Florida,
    2004); Leonard Rogoff, *Homelands: Southern Jewish Identity in Durham
    and Chapel Hill, North Carolina* (Tuscaloosa: University of Alabama
    Press, 2001); Bryan Edward Stone, *The Chosen Folks: Jews on the
    Frontiers of Texas* (Austin: University of Texas Press, 2010). Rogoff
    and Stone's books are not restricted to, but still contain rich
    analysis of, civil rights issues.

[^4]: Karen S. Anderson, *Little Rock: Race and Resistance at Central
    High School* (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2007).

[^5]: Clive Webb, *Rabble Rousers: The American Far Right in the Civil
    Rights Era* (Athens: University of Georgia Press, 2010).

[^6]: Andrew S. Moore. *The South's Tolerable Alien: Roman Catholics in
    Alabama and Georgia, 1945--1970* (Baton Rouge: Louisiana State
    University Press, 2007).
