---
layout: article
title: "Review: God's Fields"
author-first: C. Riddick
author-last: Weber
author: C. Riddick Weber
author-note: "C. Riddick Weber is an assistant professor of pastoral 
ministry at Moravian Theological Seminary."
vol: 14
year: 2012
book-reviewed: "Leland Ferguson. <em>God's Fields: Landscape, Religion, 
and Race in Moravian Wachovia</em>. Gainesville: University of Florida 
Press, 2011. 288 pp. ISBN 978-0-9130-3748-6."
---

Leland Ferguson follows up on his award-winning writing and research in
archeology and colonial African American culture with a more narrowly
focused study of the eighteenth and nineteenth century burial practices
of the *Unitas Fratrum*. This religious denomination, more commonly
known as the Moravian Church, settled the Wachovia region of piedmont
North Carolina, which is roughly modern Forsyth County. The main title
of this work is Ferguson's translation of *Gottesacker*, the German term
used by Moravians for their burial grounds, which rightly informs the
reader that this work is primarily archeological. However, as the
subtitle implies, the author also looks for both the contributing
factors and resulting outcomes of changes over time in these burial
practices. Thus, to explain these shifts, Ferguson also draws heavily on
official church records and family communications. Despite the political
and racial complexity of the subject matter, the end result is a very
readable work that shows the changes in the ways Moravians dealt with
race, which eventually led to spiritual and geographical segregation.

To make this work suitable for advanced undergraduate and graduate
students, Ferguson includes a brief, broad history of the Moravian
Church. He discusses Moravian theology, socio-economic constructs, town
planning, missiology, and racial awareness. Ferguson builds the case
that Moravians arrived in Wachovia Region of North Carolina as a
community-oriented, egalitarian society with very progressive views on
race and inclusivity. He shows that over the course of the next century,
Moravians shed much of their distinctive identity and adopted local
approaches to liberty, gender, property, and race, including the
willingness or desire to own people of other races. Ferguson illustrates
how detrimental this course of events was for African Americans
affiliated with the Moravians, either by ties of church membership or
those owned as slaves. In painting an ever-bleaker picture of life for
these African Americans, Ferguson avoids overly large brushstrokes,
pointing out differences in practices between Moravians, sometimes even
between members of the same extended family. Ferguson shows that many
Moravians resisted the American values that emphasized work for personal
profit over a sense of vocation that benefitted the community that were
an important part of the changes in Moravian approaches to slavery and
race. This nuanced account is situated in a larger explanation of how
much the Moravians lost from their original utopian goals.

Though Ferguson notes that African Americans were members of other
Moravian settlements in the Wachovia region, he focuses on the town of
Salem. He devotes the bulk of this book to the relationship between
Moravians of the originally integrated congregation of Salem and later
the separate congregation of Saint Philips Moravian, which white
Moravians established for African Americans. Ferguson's archeological
research both on the various church buildings and the burial practices
that the white Moravians established for African Americans provided the
foundational information for his writing.

The Saint Philips buildings and the God's Acre---the cemetery---for this
congregation are located within the historic district of Old Salem.
Ferguson addresses the ways that relationship between Old Salem, the
Moravian Church, and the Saint Philips congregation further complicates
the representation of African American life in and around Salem,
especially since Old Salem endeavors to deal with issues of history
rather than religion. Furthermore, just as the physical layout of the
eighteenth-century community of Salem and the various access points that
visitors had to that Moravian town affected the understandings that
historical "others" had of Salem, so too do the decisions that Old Salem
has made regarding signage and historical interpretation affect the
understandings that contemporary "others" develop regarding Moravians
and race in previous centuries and possibly even in the present.

Ferguson deals with these complex issues with both accuracy and tact.
Race, church property, and membership in various Moravian religious
groups are not just relegated to history. Early in the book Ferguson
refers to an official church resolution from 2006, and his appendices
contain a 2010 news release, showing that the Salem Congregation had
once again included the Saint Philips Moravian Church within its member
institutions.

Ferguson is honest in acknowledging his personal history and interest.
He notes at the outset his own contact with Moravians, his appreciation
for certain customs and practices, and his discomfort with other racial
and ethnic attitudes that he encountered earlier in his life, which were
the eventual outcomes of the changes he addresses in this work. He ends
by reciting many questions of history, race, topography, voice,
participation, and past and present practice that still remain, and
celebrates the value of these questions. With this book, Ferguson offers
a wealth of historical and archeological evidence to help people enter
into these questions as more informed participants.
