---
layout: article
title: "Review: The Color of Christ"
author-first: Reggie L.
author-last: Williams
author: Reggie L. Williams
author-note: "Reggie L. Williams is an assistant professor in Christian ethics at
McCormick Theological Seminary."
vol: 14
year: 2012
book-reviewed: "Edward J. Blum and Paul Harvey. <em>The Color of Christ: The Son of God and
the Saga of Race in America</em>. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina
Press, 2012. 281 pp. ISBN 978-0-8078-3572-2."
---

Edward J. Blum and Paul Harvey's *The Color of Christ* presents readers
a detailed engagement with contentious subject matter. Religion,
politics, and race are often taboo conversation topics, especially in
mixed company. But this work is neither shy nor pretentious about
bringing all three subjects into conversation.

The authors bookend the narrative with riveting images from the basement
of the 16th Street Baptist Church in Birmingham, Alabama. On a Sunday
morning in September, 1963, four African American girls were killed when
the church was infamously bombed---not many days after Martin Luther
King Jr. gave his captivating "I have a dream" speech from the steps of
the Lincoln Memorial. The blast also damaged the face of a stained-glass
image of a white Jesus. Blum and Harvey's prologue demands that we
ponder the implications of the presence of that white Jesus in that
space and in that moment. Were there any connections between Jesus, the
lives of the killers, and the lives of the children? What was Jesus
doing there?

After the prologue, we encounter an abundance of historical content to
assist us in answering those questions. But, if one were not careful,
one could read *the book* and come away thinking of Jesus in the United
States as primarily a figment of creative American minds. In Blum and
Harvey's account, Jesus may seem to be nothing more than a
shape-shifting, community fetish of time-bound ideas, tooled by specific
groups, at specific times, for power grabs. But that would be too narrow
a read.

Instead, those who *read* *The Color of Christ* might note how the
authors pay attention to the rhetoric surrounding aesthetic
representations of Christ that demonstrate the potency of the
relationship between race, religion, and politics in American history.
Indeed, race, religion, and politics have been so bound together in the
U.S. that, as Blum and Harvey so eloquently describe, images of Jesus
have served to represent divine rights to white political, cultural, and
social authority, as well as hope for the racially oppressed.

For example, Blum and Harvey make note of the fraudulent "Publius
Lentulus" letter. They describe the "letter"---a document supposedly
written by a governor of Judea during Jesus' of Nazareth's life, a man
named Publius Lentulus, who was an eyewitness to Jesus's appearance. But
Blum and Harvey point out that it was in fact written centuries after
Jesus (between the tenth and the fourteenth centuries), and served
primarily to describe Jesus visually as a European male, physically and
morally. That is precisely the letter's value; it was a device meant to
legitimize white power and authority from the era of slavery through to
the civil rights struggle.

I agree with the authors' take on the letter, but its significance
demands a deeper engagement. The fraudulent letter's white
interpretation in America grew out of a longstanding European racial
ethos. This ethos held Europe as more than a geographical location or a
collection of empires. Instead, Europeans saw themselves as burdened
with the task of civilizing the rest of the world in the age of
discovery. As Charles Mills argues in *The Racial Contract* (1997),
Europe was also a people-making process through which so-called
"savages" in the uncharted territories were brought into existence
(supposedly discovered), and simultaneously Christianized, as they were
"civilized." Willie Jennings' *The Christian Imagination: Theology and
the Origins of Race* (2010) has shown that European empires fused
Christian sensibilities with imperial interests, mingling colonial
desires with their distribution of Jesus. This imperial drive produced
an added result of birthing the modern language of race, which worked to
situate native bodies in colonized spaces, in relationship to the divine
authority of European empires over colonized subjects. Empires
proclaimed themselves as saviors of the world. However, multiple
European empires competed for ownership of Jesus. From the late
fifteenth and early sixteenth century Iberian Peninsula in the south, to
the seventeenth century British Empire in the north, Europeans
conflicted over differing interpretations of Christ for their missionary
endeavors and quest for legitimacy in their claims for power. I will say
more about the international reach of the white Christ below.

*The Color of Christ* introduces us, in the first chapter, to the
European power struggle over Jesus, in the early stages of European
colonization of the Americas. The Spanish Empire, and its Catholicism,
was first to assert influence in the Americas. When the Puritans arrived
in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, the conflict present among
the Empires in Europe became one that was present within the colonies in
America. And in Blum and Harvey's analysis, that conflict fueled the
drama of religion and politics that occupies the remainder of the book.

Native Americans and enslaved Africans were caught in the middle of the
European struggle for Christ, played out in new religious movements and
wars. Catholics (Iberian Christians) in the "New World," and the later
arriving Puritan colonists (north European Protestants), set the stage
for the long-standing contest between Europeans in America that made
Jesus into a totem of the powerful. In contrast to the Catholics, the
Puritans were iconoclasts, and like the Native Americans and the
Africans, Puritans also knew the sting of physical abuse by Catholics
and the Anglican Church. Yet, as Blum and Harvey indicate, for Africans
in the colonies the struggle for Christ began in the transatlantic slave
trade as cargo.

For Puritans, Christ was represented in the community by nothing more
than a disciplined Christian lifestyle. But in their interaction with
Native Americans and Africans, leading Puritans like Cotton Mather had
difficulty seeing the life of a Christ-follower as one that was possible
for them. For Mather, they were perpetually the religious and cultural
other. This notion justified Africans' status as cargo. The theological
performance of race, with its connection of white to Jesus, included
non-white people in its Christian worldview as subordinates.

At this point in their argument, Blum and Harvey claim that a white
Christ was not yet present in America. But it is clear that his absence
was purely aesthetic. The rhetoric and worldview of the white Christ had
crossed the ocean with the Europeans. Cotton Mather's stated assumptions
about the potential for Native Americans and Africans to be Christians
indicate a devotion to a racist white Jesus that was performed in
customs and rituals unfamiliar to non-whites. This devotion to the
religious performance of whiteness occurred prior to its being depicted
artistically as white. It was not long before the rhetoric of power,
race, and religion was indeed aesthetically identified in images of the
white Jesus, portrayed in artwork, literature, and later in film. The
impact has been nothing less than epic.

But Blum and Harvey also point out that oppressed people were also
acquainted with a hermeneutic of Jesus. The power of *The Color of
Christ* lies within the way the authors juxtapose the oppressive white
"Publius Lentulus" Jesus with the Jesus of the oppressed who see him as
co-sufferer. The white Jesus cannot impose himself in such a way that
disallows him from being interpreted organically within the experience
of oppressed communities. Ironically, even Warner Sallman's *Head of
Christ* (1941) painting, the quintessential representation of the
Publius Lentulus letter, served to illustrate the power of theological
reinterpretation within a black experience; a Jesus made by and for
oppressors, reinterpreted by and for the oppressed.

Historically, however, the people oppressed by the white Christ were not
only in America. Here I want to return to my claims made above. Blum and
Harvey briefly mention Dietrich Bonhoeffer and, alongside the struggle
laid out in each chapter, it indicates an implicit attention to the
global influence of the racialized Jesus in their analysis. The author's
arguments could be strengthened by more explicit attention to the
international presence and reach of the white Christ.

Bonhoeffer's theological education in post-imperial Germany was dripping
with the rhetoric of politics, power, and religion. He became a
theologian in that German environment. What he saw from leading
intellectuals, artists, poets, and preachers during the Harlem
Renaissance---while he was a postdoctoral student in Harlem, New York,
from 1930 to 1931---was instrumental in disrupting the work of the
German white Christ in his theological imagination. The language of the
*die Herrenvolk*, or "master race," alongside *die Untermenschen*, or
"the subhuman races," in interwar Germany proved deeply problematic to
Bonhoeffer, but not to his other German Christian colleagues. His
exposure to the impact of the white Christ on oppressed people in
America was not an experience they shared. But it made him capable of
seeing the white Christ and its danger in Germany. Just as he did in
Harlem, Bonhoeffer chose devotion to the Christ who knew the experience
of maltreatment by the imperial white Christ. In Germany, that belief
him to advocate solidarity with oppressed Jews, rather than safety with
powerful Aryan Christians. Hence, the American white Christ proved to be
no less than a sibling of the white Christ in Germany. The two were at
least related, if not the same person.
