---
layout: article
title: "Review: From Bible Belt to Sunbelt"
author-first: Joseph
author-last: Williams
author: Joseph Williams
author-note: "Joseph Williams is an assistant professor of religion at Rutgers University."
vol: 14
year: 2012
book-reviewed: "Darren Dochuk, <em>From Bible Belt to Sunbelt: Plain-Folk Religion, Grassroots Politics, and the Rise of Evangelical Conservatism</em>. New York: W. W. Norton, 2011. xxiv + 520pp. ISBN: 978-0-393-06682-1."
---

In October of 1970, Ronald Reagan met with several influential leaders
of charismatic renewal in the U.S., including George Otis, Harald
Bredesen, and Pat and Shirley Boone. When the group joined hands to pray
at the conclusion of the meeting, Otis, who served as a general manager
of the Lear Jet Corporation before committing to full-time ministry,
felt compelled to deliver a message from God to the then-governor of
California: "If you walk uprightly before Me," Otis nervously
prophesied, "you will reside at 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue" (370--71).

Reagan's meeting with these charismatic leaders, most of whom lived in
California at the time, graphically illustrated the powerful nexus
between conservative politics and conservative evangelicalism that
emerged in Southern California and eventually helped shape U.S. politics
across the nation. Whereas Otis credited his prophecy to the
spur-of-the-moment inspiration of the Holy Spirit, Darren Dochuk's
fascinating, thoroughly researched book reveals the extent to which this
unique encounter represented a culmination of trends that were literally
decades in the making.

Dochuk's narrative begins in the western South. He details the plight of
plain-folk southerners who sought to escape the dire economic conditions
in the region during the 1930s and early 1940s. Drawn by the promise of
better opportunities, numerous individuals migrated to Southern
California, bringing their distinctive culture and outlook with them. In
contrast to their counterparts in the Deep South, individuals from
states such as Arkansas, Oklahoma, and Texas tended to embrace a "purer
populist doctrine that combined a radical individualism,
experimentalism, and egalitarianism with a willingness to unite in
protection of their interests" (10). Religion, of course, was a crucial
component in this culture, and Dochuk effectively demonstrates the way
in which Baptists, Pentecostals, and other evangelicals from the region
"folded the teachings of Jesus and Jefferson into a formula for
participatory politics" (17).

If these southerners brought to Southern California a distinctive brand
of God and politics characterized by an "innate inventiveness and
combativeness," they also changed in important respects as they
established themselves as a permanent fixture on the West Coast (xvii).
Transplanted evangelicals increasingly began to emulate some of the more
cosmopolitan instincts of their neighbors. More often than not, they
shed overt forms of anti-Semitism and racism, and also enjoyed the
economic benefits of living in an area dominated by burgeoning
defense-related industries. Of even greater significance politically,
numerous believers came to question previous deeply engrained political
loyalties. Their emergence on the California political scene brought to
the fore tensions in the New Deal Democratic coalition, as social
Democrats sought to curb the influence of the growing number of southern
evangelicals in their midst. Dochuk skillfully outlines the competing
interests and visions at stake in this battle for the soul of the
California Democratic Party, calling attention to failed efforts during
the 1940s to reconcile religious conservatism with an economic populism.
Disillusioned by these internecine quarrels and by the success of
progressive Democrats who championed a more robust multicultural
nationalism, the door opened for southern evangelicals' political
realignment and their increasing identification with the Republican
Right.

Having set the stage for southern evangelicals' sharp rightward turn,
Dochuk spends the remainder of the book detailing the efforts of a
diverse and colorful cast of characters who spearheaded the formation of
a united "evangelical front." These individuals, all of whom had
significant ties to the western South, pushed and prodded their fellow
evangelicals to embrace the merger of political and religious
conservatism by means of an increasingly dense "network of schools,
interdenominational organizations, communication systems, and
associations" (xxi). Demonstrating an impressive mastery of a wide range
of source materials, Dochuk traces the influence of figures such as
George Pepperdine, a wealthy auto supply salesman turned educator; E. V.
Hill, a charismatic black preacher who criticized the civil rights
movement; and the southern-born entertainer Pat Boone. Alongside
discussion of these evangelical powerbrokers, Dochuk also skillfully
interweaves the stories of individuals like Marie King, a legal
secretary for MGM whose eventual embrace of the Republican Party
epitomized his argument. Throughout he consistently demonstrates
Southern California's role as an ideal incubator for the kind of
grassroots political mobilization that would come to define later
evangelical forays into politics on the national stage.

Despite his otherwise exemplary attention to detail and nuance, it is
fair to say that Dochuk never fully addresses noteworthy antecedents to
the trends he describes that potentially complicate some of his claims
regarding southern evangelicals' unique contributions to Southern
California religion and politics. He follows other historians in
contrasting his protagonists and Southern California's resident
evangelicals, who "turned 'serious, quiet, intense, humorless,
sacrificial, and patient' in the peak religious experience." A
significant proportion of California's non-southern evangelicals may
have resembled this description, yet a number of others clearly did not.
Already by the 1920s the Canadian-born Pentecostal celebrity Aimee
Semple McPherson established her ministry in Los Angeles, and around the
same time the Oxford-educated pentecostal Charles Price also began
attracting very large crowds in a variety of venues along the West
Coast. Suffice it to say the style and substance of their ministries
mirrored in many respects that of Dochuk's "'busy, vocal, and
promotional' and 'task-oriented'" southern evangelicals (xvii). To be
fair, Dochuk mentions the 1906 Pentecostal revival at Azusa Street in
Los Angeles, highlighting the southern roots of some of its leaders, and
he does make cursory references to both McPherson and Price. That said,
the biographies of these two prominent Pentecostals, as well as their
evident appeal, underline the degree to which non-southern evangelicals
helped pave the way for the success of their southern co-laborers later
in the century. In addition, McPherson's forays into politics beginning
in the 1930s and her efforts to mobilize her constituency on behalf of
the U.S. government during World War II set an important precedent for
the overt politicization of evangelicalism that Dochuk outlines, even if
she did not align herself so clearly with the Republican Right. None of
these observations negate Dochuk's basic argument regarding the powerful
impact that southern evangelicals' large-scale migration had on the
region, though the precursors to southern evangelicals' style of
religion mentioned above do merit greater attention in the text.

These comments should not detract from what Dochuk has accomplished. As
he suggests, too many histories of the Religious Right treat it as an
overnight phenomena that burst on the scene in the 1970s and 1980s.
Dochuk's meticulous history successfully focuses the conversation on an
earlier era. In the process he shines a bright spotlight on Southern
California and on the numerous individuals with ties to the region who
eventually played a crucial role energizing politically active
evangelicals nationwide.
