---
layout: article
title: "Review: Southern Character"
author-first: Amy Louise
author-last: Wood
author: Amy Louise Wood
author-note: "Amy Louise Wood is an associate professor of history at 
Illinois State University."
vol: 14
year: 2012
book-reviewed: "Lisa Tendrich Frank and Daniel Kilbride, eds.  
<em>Southern Character: Essays in Honor of Bertram Wyatt-Brown</em>.
Gainesville: University Press of Florida, 2011. 301 pp. ISBN 
978-0-8130-3690-8."
---

The fifteen essays in this collection stem from a conference organized
in 2005 in honor of Bertram Wyatt-Brown, who held the Milbauer Chair in
History at the University of Florida from 1983 until his retirement in
2004. Wyatt-Brown's influence on the fields of southern cultural and
intellectual history, as well as U.S. religious history and gender
studies, has been profound. *Southern Character* is a fitting tribute to
this influence, as well as his generosity as a scholar and teacher. The
essays were all penned by former students, except for the opening piece,
a loving personal and intellectual biography written by his friend and
colleague, Charles Joyner. The collection as a whole, however, does not
ruminate on Wyatt-Brown's scholarship, but rather is meant to showcase
his impact as a scholar and as a mentor in the profession. For that
reason, the essays, which address a wide array of topics, many of which
only indirectly relate to Wyatt-Brown's work, will be of interest to
scholars in a number of fields and sub-fields.

The diversity of the collection reflects the expanse of Wyatt-Brown's
intellectual interests. As Joyner points out, he read deeply into the
fields of anthropology, literary criticism, psychology, and theology,
and wrote numerous books and articles on slavery, abolitionism, southern
literary culture, and the southern psyche. He is best known for his
seminal book, *Southern Honor* (1982), which examined the persistence in
the Old South of honor, that social concept upon which a man's public
identity and therefore his self-worth was based. In that book and more
recently in *The Shaping of Southern Culture* (2001), Wyatt-Brown
expounded on the ways in which honor gave shape to southern conceptions
of manhood, race, violence, politics, war, and religion.

Several essays in this volume take up the issue of southern honor,
bearing the stamp of their mentor directly. Daniel W. Stowell evaluates
honor's impact on Abraham Lincoln's personal and political life. He
argues that honor shaped Lincoln's values in his early years, but as his
legal career flourished, he became invested in the law to settle
disputes, which ultimately led him to underestimate the honor-fueled
southern outrage that precipitated secession. Lisa Tendrich Frank looks
at how the conception of honor informed white elites' responses to
Sherman's March. To southern white women, the ransacking of their cities
felt like a personal assault upon their virtue, as union soldiers
entered and rummaged through their private spaces. Unable to protect
their women from this humiliating attack, southern men felt dishonored.
These essays, while provocative, unfortunately exemplify one of the
dangers of using honor as an explanatory concept: employed too loosely
and defined too broadly, it can lead to reductionist arguments.

Christopher J. Olsen employs the concept more successfully in an essay
that illuminates the role that honor played in antebellum southern
politics. He argues that because political parties were weak in rural
areas, politics was more personal, operating not through institutional
bureaucracies, but "within networks of friends, neighbors, and extended
kin" (45). Manhood, in that context, denoted not only power or mastery
over others, but also signified one's obligations and duties to others.
A man's reputation within these networks---his honor---thus mattered to
his political fortunes more than it might in party-driven environments.
In the vein of Stephanie McCurry and others, Olsen persuasively uses
culture and gender to explicate electoral politics.

The essays that address various aspects of southern religiosity are also
some of the strongest in the volume. Randall Stephens examines Wesleyan
missionaries and their thwarted attempts to spread the holiness movement
in the antebellum South. Their adherence to abolitionism was bound up
with their belief in spiritual perfectionism, which led white southern
Christians to reject and persecute them. Stephens carefully shows that
southerners felt threatened by Wesleyan holiness because of their
defensiveness about slavery; theological views became inseparable from
the politics of slavery. Stephens thus furthers our understanding of why
southern Christians rejected the liberalism of northern Protestantism,
with its focus on spiritual and social progress. Glenn Crothers' essay
on antebellum Quakers in northern Virginia pairs well with Stephens's
study. Although their anti-slavery views set them apart from their
neighbors, Crothers argues that Virginian Quakers adhered strongly to a
southern identity, suggesting that proslavery views did not a
"southerner" make. His evidence does not always support his argument,
but he does disrupt any monolithic understanding of antebellum southern
culture. Jeffrey Anderson similarly explores southern religious
diversity in an astute historiographical exegesis of two influential
studies of Voodoo---or Hoodoo---culture: Robert Tallant's 1946 *Voodoo
in New Orleans* and Zora Neale Hurston's 1931 essay, "Hoodoo in
America." His essay challenges recent scholarly assessments of these
works and, in doing so, questions many romantic myths that surround
Hoodoo.

Finally, Andrew Moore offers a fascinating look at anti-abortion
politics in the South. He shows that Southern Baptists initially had a
nuanced view toward abortion, in part because they associated the
pro-life movement with Catholics. He is most concerned, however, with
the impact of the civil rights movement on both Baptist and Catholic
struggles to determine "the proper role of faith and religious liberty
in public life" (202). Catholics developed the pro-life movement in
strained tandem with the civil rights movement. On the one hand, they
blamed the movement for a new emphasis on individual rights, over and
against communal obligations, which they believed had led to the
liberalization of abortion laws, culminating in *Roe v. Wade*. On the
other hand, they appropriated the secular rhetoric of "individual
rights" to make their case for the protection of fetal life, deflecting
attention away from theological arguments.

Other essays address topics ranging from early Creek and Seminole
identities to the public fascination with marriages between Chinese men
and white Women in the Jim Crow South to the politics surrounding the
proposed construction of the Cross Florida Barge Canal in the 1960s. The
diversity of the collection means that there are no common topics,
themes, or interpretations put forward. In that sense, it does not quite
hold together. But it does signify Wyatt-Brown's prodigious and lasting
imprint on the field of southern studies.
