---
layout: article
title: "African Religions in the Early South"
author-first: Jason
author-last: Young
author: Jason Young
author-note: "Jason Young is an associate professor of history at the University of Buffalo."
vol: 14
year: 2012
---

Writing in 1978, famed historian Albert Raboteau suggested that in
British North America, the slaves' "African religious heritage was
lost."[^1] While religious practices that bore clearly the stamp of
specific African influences thrived in the former slave societies of
Central and South America, "African retentions in the United States,"
Raboteau contended, "cannot be ascribed with any certainty to definite
areas of West Africa."[^2] In explaining this development, Raboteau
suggested that the United States was unique among all other New World
slave societies in its creation of a slave society where slaves
comprised a consistently low percentage of the overall population, where
plantations remained relatively small, and where slaves achieved natural
increase at a relatively early date. Without a decided numerical
majority and with natural increase eliminating the need to replenish the
slave class with steady streams of African laborers, "it was not
possible to maintain the rites of worship, the priesthood, or the
'national' identities which were the vehicles and supports for African
theology and cult organization."[^3] Instead, slavery in the United
States destroyed the African religious heritage as "the gods of Africa
gave way to the God of Christianity."[^4]

The broad contours of this argument---and, in particular, the notion of
African cultural loss in the United States under slavery---has enjoyed a
remarkably long life in American slave historiography. In some of the
earliest scholarly writing on the subject, this argument emerged as a
presumption of enslaved African cultural vacuity. Writing in 1959,
Stanley Elkins contended that the cultural distance between African and
African American culture was "even wider than we imagined."[^5]
Beginning at the point of initial enslavement and transport from Africa,
through the dreaded Middle Passage and on to the United States, much of
the slave's "past had been annihilated; nearly every prior connection
had been severed." Having been so thoroughly set adrift from culture and
history, Elkins queried, "Where then was he to look for new standards,
new cues--who would furnish them now?"[^6] In a word, the master.

Much of the earliest historical record of slavery makes clear the
presumptions of planters who saw in enslaved Africans so many *tabula
rasa* whose naturally mimetic personalities made them specially suited
to receive the bounty of presumably superior European ways and manners.
But despite slaves' skills at imitation, planters still decried their
efforts, arguing that they imbibed the culture, language, and customs of
the master class only imperfectly, due to their presumed cultural
inferiority.[^7]

Many early chroniclers of U.S. slavery, basing their arguments
principally on sources drawn from the master class, came predictably to
similar conclusions. One historian assured readers that the slaves'
language, even if peppered with some "unconsciously preserved" African
words, was little more than "the crude and ungrammatical English of an
illiterate folk."[^8] In language as well as in religion, some concluded
that Africans "merely followed and enlarged upon the Christian example
provided by whites."[^9] According to historian Kenneth Stampp,

There is no need to trace back to Africa the slave's...dread of witches,
ghosts, and hobgoblins, his confidence in good-luck charms, his alarm at
evil omens, his belief in dreams, and his reluctance to visit burying
grounds after dark. These superstitions were all firmly rooted in
Anglo-Saxon folklore.[^10]

In the end, the slaves' English was broken, their manner brusque and
their religion little more than ecstatic perversions of a more staid
Protestant moral model.[^11]

While few, if any, scholars would today argue that enslaved Africans
arrived in the Americas as blank slates, or that the cultures and
religions of Africa were of little consequence in the subsequent
development of African American culture, at least one strain of this
older argument persists; namely, the idea that enslaved men and women in
British North America were unable to preserve and maintain African
systems of belief. Writing in *Awash in a Sea of Faith* (1990), Jon
Butler argues that between 1680 and 1760, "African slaves in the British
mainland colonies experienced a spiritual holocaust that effectively
destroyed traditional African religious *systems*," though some
particular and discrete religious practices remained.[^12] African
religious practices may have persisted in the Americas, but only---as
Saidiya Hartman suggests in a similar context---in a manner "akin to a
phantom limb, in that what is felt is no longer there."[^13]

In direct opposition to these claims, another historiographical
tradition asserted the primacy of African culture and religion in the
development of black culture in the United States and elsewhere. The
clarion call for this approach can be found in Melville Herskovits's
1941 publication, *The Myth of the Negro Past.* In it, Herskovits
argued for the substantial, significant, and continued influence of
Africa in the histories, lives and cultures of blacks throughout the
Americas.[^14] Herskovits' early arguments were strengthened in the work
of subsequent scholars. For example, Sterling Stuckey argued not only
that African cultural and religious elements persisted in the United
States, but also that the realm of ritual and belief constituted the
cultural center around which African Americans formed themselves into a
people. In this sense, African religion was the source of African
American identity.[^15]

More recently, a growing body of scholarship makes increasingly clear
the role that the long arm of Africa played in the cultural and
religious lives of enslaved Americans. Walter Rucker, writing in *The
River Flows On* (2007), argues that a widespread set of African-derived
beliefs in spiritual forces and ideas about death, the afterlife, and
transmigration proved crucial in the development of slave resistance and
revolt in the United States.[^16] Religion, in this sense, not only
helped forge a people, as Stuckey had argued earlier, but also
strengthened the community ethic of resistance that made large-scale
slave rebellion possible. This was certainly true for Nat Turner, the
slave preacher turned rebel who, in 1831, organized the country's
largest slave insurrection after receiving divine inspiration and
instruction to do so.

Notwithstanding these recent developments, presumptions of African
cultural loss in the face of American slavery continue to play a large
role in debates about early African American culture, making clear the
difficulties, not only historical, but also historiographical, of
claiming a space for Africa in the early religious development of the
United States. As Michael Gomez notes, "the cultural and social
transformations of transported Africans tend to invite a quality of
critique unique in its level of elevated scrutiny, emphasizing distance
and lacunae in the substance and circumstances separating Africa and the
Americas."[^17] Whether intended or not, the terms of this opposition
result "in the Negrofication of the African-descended in the Americas,"
by which Africa is regarded as of little or no significance to the
experience and history of black people in the New World.[^18] At the
same time, this failure to see Africa in America contributes to the
"reification of the African as the quintessential Other."[^19]

The suggestion that African systems of belief were lost in the Americas
is predicated, at least in part, on the idea that cultural practices
might be transported as were so many commodities in the grand commercial
exchanges that occurred around the Atlantic. Whatever we might say of
African religious systems, we know that they were very much in flux
between the fifteenth and the eighteenth centuries due to the
dislocations of the trans-Atlantic slave trade, and also to the mere
passage of time and circumstance. Evidence of new and dynamic religious
and ritual configurations is evident throughout the continent in this
period. One thinks, for example, of Dona Beatriz, the Kongolese
prophetess who, after undergoing a transformative spiritual experience
in the early eighteenth century, revealed a revised Christian theology
that challenged the nativity and nationality of Christ and derided the
Catholic Church for its racism.[^20] Her message did not die with her
execution in 1706, but traveled throughout the Americas with her
followers and adherents who were swept up *en masse* and sent as slaves
to the plantation Americas. In this way, the Atlantic slaving zone was a
highly contested and contingent space where all sorts of
systems---political, economic and certainly religious---were ever
changing. To be sure, slaves did not merely replicate Africa in the
Americas; but neither should we expect them to have done so. The
language of cultural *loss* and of slaves' *failure* to reconstitute
religious systems paints a dire portrait of African American life and
belief as an always already fractured piece of some formerly African
cultural and religious whole.

The question of Africa's role in the development of African American
religion is a vexed matter. "Inevitably, it is highly political," as one
historian recently noted.[^21] But going even further, anthropologist
Richard Price suspects that something even more nefarious is afoot in
these opposing schools of thought. Writing in "On the Miracle of
Creolization," Price maintains that it is "hard to escape the conclusion
that ideology and politics---the specifics of North American identity
politics---continue to direct the master narratives, as well as
influence how they are read."[^22] Amounting to a "motivated erasure of
countervailing scholarship," Price suggests that this type of identity
politics may be reduced to base "careerism" as expressed in
disagreements "between Africanists and Americanists and sometimes
between historians and anthropologists, but more importantly on
underlying ideologies or partis-pris."[^23] Price charges
"Africa-centrists" as well as their sympathizers and apologists with
bending or ignoring counter evidence to support ideological positions.
Scholars who argue for the centrality of Africa in the subsequent
development of African American cultures are likely representing an
ideological, rather than a historical position.

I have suggested in another context the need to change the terms of a
debate that has become fraught in several ways. Drawing on the work of
David Scott, I have expressed concern that much of this debate has been
verificationist in its orientations. On both sides of the debate, the
central questions have been whether or not and to what extent African
American cultures are authentically African; and whether or not and to
what extent black people in the United States have retained (one might
say, performed) an authentic memory of their past.[^24] In order to
enter the fray, one must engage the debate on its own terms by
presuming, on the one hand, that pasts are such as can be identified in
their authenticity and, on the other, that the special task of an
anthropology of peoples of African descent consists of providing the
evidence, both theoretical and methodological, necessary to debate the
role of African pasts in black American slave culture.[^25] Ultimately,
Scott contends, these studies rest on the assumption that "peoples of
African descent in the New World require something like anthropology, a
science of culture, to provide them with the foundational guarantee of
an authentic past."[^26]

But what does it mean to be authentically African? Or, more to the
point, what are the limits of authenticity? Scholars have typically
defined traditional African religion too narrowly. From the vastness of
African religious beliefs and practices, a smaller set of well-known and
often repeated tropes describe what is *african* about African
religions, leaving whole fields of religious belief and practice beyond
the pale. Writing in the seminal *African Religions and Philosophy*
(1969), John S. Mbiti describes traditional African religion this way:

In traditional religions there are no creeds to be recited; instead the
creeds are written in the heart of the individual.... There are no
sacred scriptures. Religion in African societies is written not on
paper, but in people's hearts.... There is no conversion from one
traditional religion to another. A person has to be born in a particular
society in order to assimilate the religious system.... African
religions have neither founders nor reformers.[^27]

First published in 1969, *African Religions* reflected its time by
underscoring the coherence and logic of African belief systems that had
for so long been dismissed as mere superstition. It is well to note that
only six years earlier, in 1963, Oxford historian Hugh Trevor-Roper
argued confidently and with no need of evidence that Africa had no
history to speak of, but only the "unrewarding gyrations of barbarous
tribes in picturesque but irrelevant corners of the globe."[^28] The
trouble with Mbiti's description, however, is its tendency to
timelessness; in its portrait of African religions as unchanging and
ahistorical (if not anti-historical). Without founders or reformers,
African religious practices are as they always have been. Interestingly,
Mbiti depicts religion as both a total institution, evident in all
aspects of life, as well as a fiercely fugitive idea, being lodged in no
one place at all---certainly not in officially sanctioned scriptures or
liturgies. African religion is transparent enough to be articulated to
the outsider and the uninitiated, but ultimately unknowable, covered as
it is in an impenetrable cultural opacity that allows no conversion.

The terms of Mbiti's description point to a linguistic and ideological
genealogy that extends back to the earliest developments of ethnographic
and anthropological approaches to African life and culture. Geoffrey
Parrinder, for example, writing in *African Traditional Religion*
(1954), argued "African tribal societies are relatively undifferentiated
and homogenous. This great comparative homogeneity of African society is
apparent in the religious sphere.... In religious beliefs, there is
great similarity between many parts of the continent."[^29] Rather than
contribute to greater cultural development, some saw this homogeneity as
a sort of stifling, unchanging sameness. Writing in *Kenya before the
White Man*, Christopher Wilson described it this way:

It is surprising to know that for many thousands of years before the
earliest records of historical time men of advanced physical type, with
at least the rudiments of culture, lived in Kenya. It is still more
surprising to realize that in spite of this eary start, those
inhabitants of Kenya made almost no further progress towards higher
human standards through all the centuries of history.[^30]

Drawn principally from European travelers' accounts and missionary
reports, these descriptions reflect less information about African
religious systems, as such, and more the emergence of an epistemological
problem to be solved. For European chroniclers, these descriptions
reflected a certain "kind of knowledge" about Africa generally that
established a set of immutable oppositions between African systems of
belief against their European counterparts; of rational modernity
against "primitive" backwardness; of true religion against base
superstition; and ultimately of white against black.[^31] In this
connection, Christianity can be seen as "the inheritor of Greek reason"
and, at the same time, the continuation and ultimate achievement of the
Judaic tradition. In this dual role---possessor of proper religion and
critic of false superstition---Western traditions supported modernity by
laying bare that body of thought, belief and practices thought
pre-modern and "primitive;" and therefore ill fit for modernity's
present and futures.[^32] Writing in a similar context, V.Y. Mudimbe
notes that "Anthropology, as well as missionary studies of primitive
philosophies, are then concerned with the study of the distance from the
Same to the Other."[^33] At bottom, this "missionary language of
derision is a cultural position, the expression of an ethno-centric
outlook."[^34]

But how is it possible that a missionary and ethnographic language of
derision could find in more current scholarly descriptions of African
religion a genealogical descendant? Or, put another way, how is it that
the post-colonial authors of African life and culture might, knowingly
or not, harken back to an older ethnographic moment? The anthropological
gaze that first contributed to the creation of binary and inherently
oppositional categories between black and white; that flattened the
great diversity of African religious life into a mere type; and that
created hierarchies for assessing these differences also provided key
elements necessary for the subsequent development of Pan-African and
Black Nationalist perspectives. If, in the hands of seventeenth- and
eighteenth-century colonialists, an ethnographic language highlighted
the difference between "the Same and the Other," the post-colonial
project did much the same via a crucial interchange between the Object
and the Subject of study. In the midst of post-colonial nationalist
movements, many black authors argued for the necessity of an African
cultural unity toward new liberatory projects. This trend is perhaps
nowhere more evident than in the work of Mbiti.

Our knowledge of "traditional African religions"---or, more to the
point, our ways of knowing these rituals and practices---derive from two
different, though intimately related epistemological streams. One, drawn
from European colonial sources, flattened the diversity and dynamism of
African religion into a foil to be compared negatively against European
models. The other, rooted in Black Nationalist and Pan-African
movements, found in traditional African culture and religion an
imperative for African unity and opposition to colonial power. But in
both formulations, the idea of traditional African religions has a
totalizing effect on our understanding of religion and belief in Africa,
marking off boundaries of what is and is not authentically African.

One consequence of this is that some religious traditions and practices
in Africa are normally regarded as always foreign to the continent. This
is certainly the case as it relates to the history of Christianity in
Africa despite its significant and longstanding history on the
continent. In the longest view, Christianity's history in Africa extends
back to the first century of the Common Era and is firmly established in
the development of the Ethiopian Coptic Church in the fourth century.
But more recently, and more germane to present considerations,
Christianity's history in West Africa extends back to the late fifteenth
century when Portuguese missionaries converted Kongo King João I in
1491. Initially embraced as a religion of the royal court, Christianity
eventually spread throughout the country with alacrity; and this
expansion from urban centers to rural provinces was largely an
indigenous affair, relying on the translation of key theological ideas
and practices into local languages and, by extension, into local ways of
being religious. John K. Thornton argues that "Christianity 'conquered'
Kongo peacefully---but at the cost of adapting itself almost wholly to
Kongolese conceptions of religion and cosmology," becoming part of the
traditional religious landscape of West-Central Africa.[^35] Many of
these Kongolege Christians found themselves swept up by the
Trans-Atlantic Slave Trade, populating British North America in large
numbers. Indeed, in the early decades of the slave trade, West-Central
Africans were over-represented when compared to Africans from other
regions, and especially so in the coastal regions of Georgia and South
Carolina where they predominated.[^36]

All of this encourages a reconsideration of the origins of African
American religious life. If Christianity is better regarded as one part
of the religious heritage that Africans bequeathed to their enslaved
progeny in the Americas, then we may need new narratives to explain more
fully the origins of Christianity among enslaved Africans, or even the
origins of the Black Church.[^37] The impetus for this reconsideration
comes from enslaved Africans themselves who claimed Christianity as part
of their African heritage. For example, in 1710, Francis Le Jau, an
Anglican missionary in South Carolina noted:

I have in this parish a few Negroe Slaves and were born and baptized
among the Portuguese.... \[T\]hey come to Church and are well instructed
so as to express a great desire to receive the H. communion *amongst
us*, I proposed to them to declare openly their Abjuring the Errors of
the Romish Church without which declaration I cou'd \[sic\] not receive
them...[^38]

After an eighteen-month term of religious instruction, Le Jau finally
welcomed two of the men to communion. But despite Le Jau's best efforts
to rid the new converts of their "Romish" trappings, he was continually
confounded by the converts' ability to manipulate the doctrine to suit
their own spiritual needs. Neither was Le Jau alone in this regard. Well
into the antebellum period, Thomas Turpin, a prominent Baptist
missionary who worked along the Georgia coast, complained bitterly that
slaves under his charge had organized Roman Catholic societies.[^39]

The insistence shown by these black Catholics mirrored that shown by
successive waves of fugitive slaves who, in the late seventeenth
century, fled Georgia and South Carolina, seeking asylum with the
Spanish in Florida. Upon arrival in Florida, Catholic missionaries
interviewed the escapees, some of whom noted that they had been
Catholics in their homelands, even though they insisted on praying in
their native tongue, much to the consternation of their priests.[^40]
All of this suggests that Christianity is part of Africa's traditional
religious heritage, upon which slaves drew in the Americas.

Of course, a similar consideration can be applied to the historical
significance of Islam in West Africa and, by extension, to enslaved
Muslims in early British North America. Like Christianity, Islam is not
typically included in that broad set of religious and spiritual
practices thought to comprise "traditional African" religions. But on
the eve of the trans-Atlantic slave trade, Islam's history in Africa had
already extended back for centuries. Michael Gomez notes that as many as
fifty percent of the slaves exported to North America were captured from
areas in West Africa where Islam was either a state religion or at least
the religion of significant minority populations. Since the Muslim
presence in North America "antedates the arrival of English colonists,"
a renewed focus on the history of Islam in British North America
promises to shed new light not only on the religious history of African
Americans, but indeed on the early religious history of the country more
generally.[^41] Spain's military outpost in Florida, located at St.
Augustine, featured a sizable population of African Muslims, while
French Louisiana also imported large numbers of African Muslims,
principally from Senegambia, Nigeria, and Sierra Leone. In British North
America, planters' stated preference for "Mandigos"---a trade name
denoting Africans from Senegambia and Sierra Leone---lead to the
importation of many African Muslims. Moreover, slave runaway ads often
included details pointing to the significant presence of Muslims among
the ranks of the enslaved.[^42]

As in the case of African forms of Christianity, much of the impetus
behind this renewed focus on Islam comes from enslaved African Muslims
themselves who worked assiduously to maintain their faith in early
British North America in the establishment of regularized daily prayer,
the maintenance and passing on of Muslim names, the use of prayer beads
and mats, and in the writing and recitation of the Qur'an.[^43]
Moreover, evidence suggests that some prominent African Americans,
Frederick Douglass chief among them, may have been a descendant of
enslaved Muslims, his family name Bailey likely being a variant of Bilal
or Bilali.[^44]

While there is not much evidence of enslaved Muslims practicing their
faith in organized congregations, ample evidence suggests that many
practiced their faith in their homes and within their larger
communities. Rosa Grant, a former slave from Possum Point, Georgia,
remembered that her grandmother prayed every morning at the rising and
the setting of the sun by facing the east whilst kneeling, bowing until
her forehead touched the ground three times, and reciting in a manner
consistent with Muslim prayer.[^45] Charles Wylly, grandson of the famed
Georgia planter Thomas Spalding, remembered seeing "devout mussulmans,
who prayed to Allah ... morning, noon and evening" on the Spalding
planation.[^46] In antebellum Georgia, Umar ibn Said, an enslaved
African, transcribed the opening chapter of the Qu'ran, passing it off
as the Lord's prayer.[^47] These examples could be much multiplied
to include several enslaved Muslims who achieved some degree of
celebrity in the United States. Abd-Rahman, known as "The Prince,"
became the most popular African in America and a *cause-celèbre* in the
1820s when a national humanitarian campaign won him not only his
freedom, but also his repatriation to Africa. Enslaved Muslims
contributed to African American society not only in the maintenance of
their faith, but also in the very process of African American identity
formation in the United States. As Gomez notes, enslaved Muslims tended
to be among the first enslaved Africans to eschew their own particular
ethnic identities in favor of larger group identities and ultimately, to
race-based affiliations.

Of course, African forms of Christianity and Islam persisted in the
slave communities of early British North America alongside that wide
range of ritual and spiritual beliefs typically called "African
traditional religions." As noted above, the very scale and scope of
these religious traditions---extending as they do across the African
continent and re-emerging in various ways throughout the plantation
Americas---means that broad descriptive generalizations may be valid,
even if not applicable to every single case. In this way, the idea of
"African traditional religions" may be useful as a heuristic
device---pointing as it does to certain broadly shared practices and
beliefs including, for example, reverence for ancestors, belief in the
unity of the sacred and the secular realms, and ritual communion with
otherworldy powers. Gomez tells us, "the essentially African perspective
of an all-encompassing dual reality permeated the cultural and social
fabric of African Americans" not only in the realm of religion, but also
in other aspects of life.[^48] The unmistakable evidence for this
perspective can be found in the persistence of the "widespread practice
of healing and intercessory procedures collectively and alternately
known as voodoo, hoodoo, conjure and root work." This persistence is
likely explained, at least in part, by the vast numbers of African
priests who were targeted by political leaders as potential threats to
power and subsequently sold to the Americas as slaves.[^49] Gomez sees
in these developments evidence of "clear continuities of African customs
and beliefs, modified for the use of Africans and their descendants as
they passed through the great tribulation."[^50]

To be sure, the use of spiritualism, divination, herbalism and allopathy
were all quite widespread among both blacks and whites in early British
North America, making the colonies home to a pronounced religious and
spiritual pluralism. But in this vast *world of wonders*, slave
conjure---comprising a diverse set of practices including herbal
remedies, divination, poisoning, and curses---was held in particular
opprobrium by the masterclass. This is because one of the principal
cohesive elements of slave conjure was its political relationship to
slavery. Writing elsewhere, I have noted that conjure provided a form of
spiritual resistance that not only undercut the authority of the
masterclass, but also established an independent realm of criminality
and justice. Conjure granted its practitioners and adherents an avenue
to influence, power, health, and retribution over which the masterclass
had little influence.[^51]

Oftentimes, these powers were used in direct resistance to slavery. Root
doctors and conjurers often used their powers to protect slaves from the
brutalities of slavery, creating in some slaves an obstinate defiance.
Perhaps the best evidence of this spirit of resistance can be found in
the example of Denmark Vesey of Charleston, South Carolina who, in 1822
directed one of the country's largest insurrectionary plots.[^52] Key to
the conspiracy was Vesey's election of Gullah Jack, a conjurer of great
repute, as his chief co-conspirator. Jack "kept African religious
traditions alive" by providing the rebels with African religious symbols
that promised victory and invincibility. He was roundly regarded as a
powerful conjurer and was both feared and respected by his fellow
slaves.[^53] Indeed, on his initial passage from Africa to South
Carolina, Jack reportedly "had his conjuring implements with him in a
bag which he brought on board the ship and always retained them."[^54]
The rebels firmly believed in Jack's powers and felt that if they
"retained the charms which he had distributed they would themselves be
invulnerable."[^55]

This ritual assurance of invincibility was widespread and long-lived
among slaves. Frederick Douglass noted his own encounter with Sandy, "a
genuine African \[who\] had inherited some of the so-called magical powers
said to be possessed by the eastern nations."[^56] When Sandy offered to
prepare a root for Douglass, which, if kept always in his possession,
would prevent any white man from striking him, Douglass reasoned: "I at
first rejected the idea that the simple carrying of a root on my right
side could possess any such magic power. I had a positive aversion to
all pretenders to '*divination'* ...but if it did me no good it could do
me no harm."[^57]

In the end, all of this points to the idea that slavery, racism,
colonialism and the capitalist project were all global phenomena that
connected black people around the world in both the process of empire
building as well as in the imperative to challenge it through
resistance. As Robin D.G. Kelley notes, these processes "were never
uniform or fixed, but did create systems that were at times tightly
coordinated across oceans and national boundaries."[^58] In this sense,
Africa's religious legacy in the Americas is found, to be sure, in the
emergence and maintenance of traditional African religious practices,
but also in the persistence of Christianity and Islam, which were each
and all intimately connected to the grand exchange of goods and people
that was at the heart of global slavery.


[^1]: Albert J. Raboteau, *Slave Religion: The 'Invisible Institution'
    in the Antebellum South* (New York: Oxford University Press, 1978),
    47.

[^2]: Ibid., 49.

[^3]: Ibid., 92.

[^4]: Ibid.

[^5]: Stanley Elkins, *Slavery: A Problem in American Institutional and
    Intellectual Life* (1959; Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
    1976), 91.

[^6]: Ibid., 101--102.

[^7]: See, for example, Elkins, *Slavery*, 132.

[^8]: Kenneth Stampp, *The Peculiar Institution: Slavery in the
    Antebellum South* (1956; New York: Vintage Books, 1989), 362--63.

[^9]: U.B. Phillips, *American Negro Slavery* (1918; Baton Rouge:
    Louisiana State University Press, 1966), 314.

[^10]: Stampp, *Peculiar Institution*, 375.

[^11]: Elkins, *Slavery*, esp. chapter 3; Stampp, *Peculiar
    Institution*, chapter 8, *passim.*

[^12]: Jon Butler, *Awash in a Sea of Faith: Christianizing the American
    People* (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1990), 153.

[^13]: Saidiya Hartman, *Scenes of Subjection: Terror, Slavery, and
    Self-Making in Nineteenth-Century America* (New York: Oxford
    University Press, 1997), 87.

[^14]: Melville Herskovits, *Myth of the Negro Past* (1941; Boston:
    Beacon Press, 1958), xiii, 6.

[^15]: Sterling Stuckey, "Through the Prism of Folklore: The Black Ethos
    in Slavery," *Massachusetts Review* 9 (1968): 417--437.

[^16]: Walter C. Rucker, *The River Flows On: Black Resistance, Culture,
    and Identity Formation in Early America* (Baton Rouge: Louisiana
    State University Press, 2007).

[^17]: Michael Gomez, *Reversing Sail: A History of the African
    Diaspora* (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2005), 2.

[^18]: Ibid., 3.

[^19]: Ibid.

[^20]: John Thornton, *The Kongolese Saint Anthony: Dona Beatriz Kimpa
    Vita and the Antonian Movement, 1684--1706* (New York: Cambridge
    University Press, 1998); and Jason Young, *Rituals of Resistance:
    African Atlantic Religion in Kongo and the Lowcountry South in the
    Era of Slavery* (Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press,
    2007), 60--64.

[^21]: Gwendolyn Midlo Hall, *Slavery and African Ethnicities in the
    Americas: Restoring the Links* (Chapel Hill: University of North
    Carolina Press, 2005), xxi.

[^22]: Richard Price, "On the Miracle of Creolization," in
    *Afro-Atlantic Dialogues: Anthropology in the Diaspora*, ed. Kevin
    Yelvington(Santa Fe: School of American Research Press, 2006), 132.

[^23]: Ibid., 124. Writing elsewhere, Richard and Sally Price argue that
    a determined researcher "who is intent on proving a chosen
    historical scenario can almost always locate some objects or design
    styles in one tradition that closely resemble some objects or design
    styles in another." See, Richard Price and Sally Price, *Maroon
    Arts* (Boston: Beacon Press, 2000), 296.

[^24]: David Scott, *Refashioning Futures: Criticism after
    Postcoloniality* (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1999), 108.

[^25]: Ibid., 108.

[^26]: David Scott, "That Event, This Memory: Notes on the Anthropology
    of African Diasporas in the New World," *Diaspora* 1(1991): 268.

[^27]: John S. Mbiti, *African Religions and Philosophy* (1969; London:
    Heinemann Press, 1990 ), 3--4.

[^28]: BBC lecture, Reported in *The Listener* (Nov. 28, 1963).

[^29]: Geoffrey Parrinder, *African Traditional Religion* (1954; London:
    Sheldon Press, 1974), 11.

[^30]: Quoted in Harold Schneider, *The Africans: An Ethnological
    Account* (Edgewood Cliffs: Prentice Hall, 1981), 8.

[^31]: V.Y. Mudimbe, *The Invention of Africa: Gnosis, Philosophy, and
    the Order of Knowledge* (Bloomington: Indiana University Press,
    1988), 44, 64. See also Paul Gilroy, *Black Atlantic: Modernity and
    Double Consciousness* (Cambridge, Harvard University Press, 1992),
    52.

[^32]: F. Eboussi-Boulaga, *Christianisme sans fétiches* (Paris:
    Présence Africaine), Quoted in Mudimbe, *Invention*, p. 51.

[^33]: Mudimbe, *Invention*, 81.

[^34]: Ibid., 52

[^35]: John Thornton, "The Development of an African Catholic Church in
    the Kingdom of Kongo, 1491--1750." in *Journal of African History*
    25:154 (1984), 157.

[^36]: Young, *Rituals*, 25, 33.

[^37]: Mudimbe, *Invention*, 59.

[^38]: Francis Le Jau, "Slave Conversion on the Carolina Frontier," in
    *African American Religious History: A Documentary Witness*, ed.
    Milton Sernett(Durham: Duke University Press, 1999), 27 (emphasis
    added). See also Annette Laing, "'Heathens and Infidels'? African
    Christianization and Anglicanism in the South Carolina Low Country,
    1700--1750, *Religion and American Culture: A Journal of
    Interpretation* 12 (2002): 197.

[^39]: Thomas Turpin in *Christian Advocate and Journal* (31 January
    1834).

[^40]: Jane Landers, *Black Society in Spanish Florida* (Urbana:
    University of Illinois Press, 1999), 48, 113.

[^41]: Michael Gomez, "Muslims in Early America," *The Journal of
    Southern History* 60 (1994): 682--84.

[^42]: Gomez, *Country Marks*, chap. 4.

[^43]: Sylvianne Diouf, *Servants of Allah: African Muslims Enslaved in
    the Americas* (New York: New York University Press, 1998), chapter 2
    and *passim* .

[^44]: Michael Gomez, *Black Crescent: The Experience and Legacy of
    African Muslims in the Americas* (New York: Cambridge University
    Press, 2005), 158.

[^45]: Diouf, *Servants*, 62.

[^46]: Ibid.

[^47]: Allan Austin, *African Muslims in Antebellum America* (New York:
    Routledge, 1997), 137--144. See also Gomez, *Black Crescent*, 143.

[^48]: Gomez, *Country Marks*, 283.

[^49]: See, for example, James Sweet, *Domingos Álvares: African
    Healing, and the Intellectual History of the Atlantic World* (Chapel
    Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2011), 21.

[^50]: Ibid., 283, 290.

[^51]: Young, *Rituals*, 139.

[^52]: Recently, the insurrectionary plot of Denmark Vesey has come
    under fire by historian Michael P. Johnson who raises questions
    about historians' use of sources and methodology in reconstructing
    the details of the plot. In particular, Johnson argues that the plot
    was the creation of paranoid court officials and modern historians
    who unwittingly adopted a "heroic" tale of resistance and projected
    it onto Vesey. The best explication of this debate, and indeed a
    thorough and convincing rebuttal by the principle parties, can be
    found in a two-part series, Robert A. Gross, ed. "Forum: The Making
    of a Slave Conspiracy," *William and Mary Quarterly,* 3rd. Ser., 58:4
    (Oct. 2001): 913--976; and *William and Mary Quarterly*, 3rd. Ser., 59:1 (Jan. 2002): 135--202.

[^53]: Robert Starobin ed., *Great Lives Observed: Denmark Vesey, The
    Slave Conspiracy of 1822* (Englewood Cliffs: Prentice Hall, 1970),
    3, 5; and Rucker, *The River Flows On,* 164--66, 169, 182.

[^54]: Zephariah Kingsley, *A Treatise on the Patriarchal, or
    Co-operative, System of Society as it Exists in Some Governments,
    and Colonies in America and in the United States, Under the Name of
    Slavery, with its Necessity and Advantages*, 2nd ed., (Tallahassee:
    n.p., 1829), 13.

[^55]: Starobin, *Denmark Vesey*, 102.

[^56]: Frederick Douglass, *Autobiographies: Narrative of the Life; My
    Bondage and My Freedom; Life and Times*, ed. Henry Louis Gates (New
    York: The Library of America, 1994), 586.

[^57]: Ibid. Interestingly, neither Douglass nor Sandy suffered physical
    abuse at the hands of abusive masters after having utilized the
    protective root.

[^58]: Robin D. G. Kelley, "How the West Was One: On the Uses and
    Limitations of Diaspora," *The Black Scholar* 30 (2000): 32.
