---
layout: article
title: "Review: A History of the Catholic Church in the American South"
author-first: Kenneth J.
author-last: Zanca
author: Kenneth J. Zanca
author-note: "Kenneth J. Zanca is a professor of philosophy and 
religious studies at Marymount College."
vol: 14
year: 2012
book-reviewed: "James M. Woods. <em>A History of the Catholic Church in 
the American South, 1513&ndash;1900</em>. Gainesville: University Press of 
Florida, 2011. 498 pp. ISBN 978-0-8130-3532-1."
---

In this volume, James Woods claims to be filling a void in the
historiography of southern religion by creating an institutional
narrative of the oldest Christian faith in the American South.
Dismissing any claim to originality (he cites in the bibliography only
three pages of original sources), the author states that his goal was to
produce a synthesis of previous (mostly) Catholic scholars' work
(referred to in the remaining 32 pages of the source material). Given
these intentions, I think he has only partially succeeded---depending on
his audience.

The material is organized into three time frames. These are: "The
Colonial Context, 1513--1763;" "American Republicanism and European
Decline, 1763--1845;" and "Resistance, Rebellion, Reconstruction, and
Regionalism, 1845--1900." It is Dr. Wood's privilege to organize his
material according to his own sense of "natural groupings" that he
thinks will help the reader follow the storyline. However, this reader
does not see the wisdom of making the third section (a mere 124 pages)
carry so much freight. It is precisely on this period where the majority
of Catholic scholarship has been focused. As a result, the treatment
remains in the realm of "fact-stacking" (well documented though it may
be), and the summary does not do justice to the literature in the field.
No "synthesis" could.

The book is cleanly written, but it reads like a text aimed at a lower
division survey course, and if that is its target, the presentation will
be found tedious by today's instant-messaging, non-readers, who are
uninformed and disinterested about most subjects historical or
institutionally religious. The 66 pages of footnotes will not be
examined. Supplementary material is helpful to non-scholars: maps, some
population tables constructed from decennial census data, but there are
surprisingly few sketches and photos of people and places for a book
spanning 387 years.

If the target audience is not the college textbook buyer, then who might
benefit from this formidable compendium of information? There does exist
a market for this book. It is a book for adult generalists: clergy,
seminarians, inter-faith discussion groups, Catholic parish adult
education classes, book-clubs of religionists, and any journalist
wishing a one-stop treatment of a religion which is professed by 23.9%
of American adults (second only to the combined "evangelical churches"
with 26.3%).

I commend Professor Woods for his seeing a need and working to meet it,
his respect for the work of other scholars in the field, and his
careful, patient reading of their work, but I fear that the medium he
employed, a synthesis of so many secondary sources, is pass√©. The book
is not for the scholar, and there are a shrinking number of readers
interested in such a narrow topic presented this way, however important
it may be to a select few.
