---
layout: article
title: "Review: The Faiths of the Postwar Presidents"
author-first: Michael
author-last: Ashcraft
author: Michael Ashcraft
author-note: "Michael Ashcraft is a professor of Religion at Truman State University."
vol: 15
year: 2013
book-reviewed: "David L. Holmes. <em>The Faiths of the Postwar
Presidents: From Truman to Obama</em>. Athens, Georgia: University of
Georgia Press,
2012. xiv + 396 pp. ISBN 978-0-8203-3862-0."
---

In this book, David L. Holmes sketches portraits of the religious lives
of the twelve men who have served as United States presidents since the
end of the Second World War. Most chapters are approximately twenty-four
pages, except for the final chapter on Obama, which is fifty pages. Each
begins with a brief family history, with special attention given to
religious background. Then Holmes describes the president’s upbringing,
major influences, religious beliefs, and public career. Throughout,
readers discover how the faith of presidents influenced their handling
of important events and developments during their term or terms.. Holmes
did considerable research, in both printed sources and archival ones
(the latter accessed at presidential libraries. Where appropriate,
Holmes provides contextual information on religious traditions and
practices for readers unfamiliar with American religious history.

Holmes does not provide an introduction or conclusion. Instead, one of
the influential American religious historians, Martin E. Marty, wrote a
three-page introduction, which largely praises Holmes. The absence of an
introduction, however, leaves readers with the chore of drawing their
own connections, comparisons, or contrasts. One notices the variation of
religious commitment among the presidents. Some, like Jimmy Carter and
George W. Bush, made their “born again” religious credentials public,
while the other presidents tended to be more vague in their religious
assertions. Holmes also notes the importance of mothers and wives in the
religious lives of presidents. Mothers seem to play a central role in
the faith of presidents, from infancy onward.. Typically the presidents
married a woman from a different religious tradition, and usually the
wife more or less abandoned her own tradition and embraced her
husband’s, but not always. And in some cases presidents and their wives
chose to affiliate with a religious tradition other than either of their
own. Finally, we discover the longstanding significance of evangelist
Billy Graham. He was close to several presidents, providing spiritual
and, sometimes, political advice and counsel. Graham emerges from the
pages of Holmes’s book as an abiding presence, either waiting in the
wings or appearing front and center on the public stage alongside a
president.

As noted above, the chapter on Obama is nearly twice as long as most of
the other chapters in this book. Twenty pages of the Obama chapter are
devoted to the controversial relationship that Obama has had with Rev.
Jeremiah Wright, pastor of the Chicago church that Obama attended
regularly, where he was married, and where his children were baptized.
During the 2008 presidential campaign, Wright made incendiary public
statements that, taken out of their African American religious context,
sounded at best unpatriotic, and at worst opposed to the core values of
the American public. Holmes takes great care to explain what Wright said
and show how Obama responded. Holmes’s book is truly an outstanding
study of the twelve presidents in recent history. Holmes looks at these
presidents under a microscope, and by avoiding a broad synthesis of the
topic, the book can be easily read in segments or as a whole. Thus,
readers interested in a close inspection of these presidents’ religious
lives will find this book rewarding.
