---
layout: article
title: "Review: Desert Rose"
author-first: Lewis V.
author-last: Baldwin
author: Lewis V. Baldwin
author-note: "Lewis V. Baldwin is a professor of Religious Studies at 
Vanderbilt University."
vol: 15
year: 2013
book-reviewed: "Edythe Scott Bagley. <em>Desert Rose: The Life and 
Legacy of Coretta Scott King</em>. Tuscaloosa: University of Alabama 
Press, 2012. 318 pp. ISBN 978-0-8173-1765-2."
---

The name of Coretta Scott King is too often associated with the image of
the supportive wife who stood behind Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.,
contributing substantially to the advancement of his public roles as a
preacher, pastor, and civil rights leader. That image is challenged and
corrected in *Desert Rose: The Life and Legacy of Coretta Scott King*.
Written by Edythe Scott Bagley, educator, activist, and sister of
Coretta Scott King, this biography highlights King’s life and
contributions as a person of faith, artist, and civil rights activist.
It is an excellent starting point for those who seek a more thoughtful
judgment about King’s place and significance in our history.

Bagley suggests that regional identity and regional responsibility were
of foremost importance in the shaping of King’s life, thinking, and
sense of purpose and mission. The title of the book, *Desert Rose*, was
derived from Bagley’s “knowledge of the region and culture” in which she
and Coretta “were born and reared” (x). The sisters grew up in rural
Marion, Alabama, in the heart of the Alabama Black Belt, under the stern
and often debilitating restrictions of the Jim Crow South. According to
Bagley, that experience shaped King’s determination to put her
education, artistic gifts, faith, and social activism to the service of
creating a better quality of life for herself, her family, and people in
America and abroad. Apparently, King’s secondary training at the Lincoln
School in Marion, as well her studies at Antioch College in Ohio and the
New England Conservatory of Music in Boston, were instrumental not only
in her development as a concert singer, but also in the shaping of her
social consciousness and her desire to struggle for social, political,
and economic justice. “In so doing,” writes Bagley, King’s “life was
like a rose pushing up from the parched, dry ground, and springing forth
in a beautiful blossom” (x).

*Desert Rose* effectively undermines the widely held belief that King’s
personal quest for equal rights and social justice grew out of her
association with Martin Luther King, Jr. It shows that the two walked
down that path together, as Dr. King so often said. Bagley makes the
point in more emphatic terms, noting that she and her sister were
products of a family of proud, land-owning black farmers who were highly
committed to the ideals of education and social equality. Much attention
is devoted to Obadiah and Bernice Scott, Bagley’s and King’s parents, to
Cora McLaughlin Scott, their paternal grandmother, and to countless
other relatives who prepared the ground for their shared educational and
social commitments as far back as the period of slavery. Thus, *Desert
Rose* is not merely a detailed account of one woman’s life, but the story
of a family that viewed education and civil rights activism as the key
to freedom and empowerment.

King’s relationship to Dr. King, courses through much of *Desert Rose*,
adding yet another chapter to the unfolding record of the civil rights
movement of the 1950s and 1960s. Virtually every civil rights campaign
led by Dr. King is discussed, from the Montgomery bus boycott
(1955–1956) up to that final sanitation worker’s crusade in Memphis,
Tennessee (1968), with special attention to King’s involvements. As
Bagley suggests, the assassination of Dr. King in Memphis, on April 4,
1968, catapulted King to leadership roles that she had not sought nor
anticipated. From that point, according to Bagley, King skillfully
combined a commitment to motherhood and the raising of her and Dr.
King’s four children with a deep devotion to freedom causes in South
Africa and elsewhere abroad, and to the preservation of her husband’s
legacy through the Martin Luther King, Jr. Center for Nonviolent Social
Change in Atlanta, Georgia, and the National King Holiday. *Desert Rose*
is actually a *vade mecum* for those who are interested in the many
dimensions of Coretta Scott King’s life and work. In this regard, Bagley
achieves the book’s stated purpose.

It is equally important to note that *Desert Rose* represents a luminous
addition to the growing body of scholarship on women in the civil rights
movement. The appearance of this biography, along with recent works
concerning Rosa L. Parks, Ella Baker, Fannie Lou Hamer, and others,
compels readers to move beyond a mere male-centric reading of the civil
rights movement and its rich legacy. Readers are reminded once again of
the pivotal importance of female leadership in the movement.

*Desert Rose* is slightly marred by the absence of a decisively critical
focus, but this is understandable when one considers the intimate
relationship between the author and the subject matter. But this
apparent weakness is more than compensated for by the book’s many
strengths, particularly in the sense that it provides details of King’s
life that do not appear in other works, including her own *My Life with
Martin Luther King, Jr.* (1969; reprinted in 1991).

This biography is a pleasure to read, and, because of Bagley’s simple
and engaging writing style, it will undoubtedly appeal to the general
reading public. Historians, sociologists, cultural theorists, religious
scholars, and specialists in other fields who hold a special interest in
African American history and culture and the civil rights movement will
benefit from Bagley’s sophisticated presentation and analysis. *Desert
Rose* is a masterfully conceived, carefully crafted, and richly
insightful work. The perspective it provides on Coretta Scott King is
rather unique, quite necessary, and helpful.

