---
layout: article
title: "Review: A Cautious Enthusiasm"
author-first: Nicholas M.
author-last: Beasley
author: Nicholas M. Beasley
author-note: "Nicholas M. Beasley is the Rector at the Church of the 
Resurrection Episcopal in Greenwood, SC."
vol: 15
year: 2013
book-reviewed: "Samuel C. Smith. <em>A Cautious Enthusiasm: Mystical
Piety and Evangelicalism in Colonial South Carolina</em>. Columbia:
University of South Carolina Press, 2013. xii + 260 pp. ISBN 
978-1-61117-131-0."
---

This learned book guides the reader into the religious landscape of
colonial South Carolina, exposing evangelical contours that many readers
may find surprising. For some time, scholars have been demonstrating
that South Carolina was not the religious wasteland that some
contemporaries (often visitors whose accounts were published) and later
historians judged it to be. Books like Louis Nelson's *The Beauty of
Holiness: Anglicanism and Architecture in Colonial South Carolina*
(2009) have taken up evidence ignored in some previous work, from
archival church records to grave markers and communion silver, arguing
for a vitality in Carolina religion that the literature had sometimes
failed to notice. Smith carries that project forward in this book, using
documentary evidence to expose mystical and political dimensions of
evangelicalism in the colony.

What is evangelicalism to Smith? He notes that it is a multivalent
phenomenon in the wider Protestant tradition, found in modes that may be
both more subjective and emotive, or doctrinal and rationalistic. A
major contribution in the book is the tracing of a mystical strand of
pietism in Carolina evangelicalism, a tradition that carried medieval
aspirations of union with the divine into the low country. Smith argues
that this mystical tradition shaped political habits and was partially
productive of the consensus (among whites) of the later colonial and
revolutionary periods. This is an interesting challenge to the long-held
view that revivals were socially disruptive in the early South. While
some readers may feel that Smith defines evangelicalism too broadly, his
careful argument illuminates the wide influence of evangelicalism in the
region.

Indeed, for Smith evangelicalism did more to create a status quo than to
resist it. He states that "evangelicalism's transcendent and flexible
qualities contributed to the formation of political and social consensus
in the South, provided lowcountry Anglican elites a new means for
perceived significance in the larger British world, helped transform in
their minds the image of slavery into a uniquely Christian institution,
and supplied impulse for a unified action into the revolutionary era"
(8). Smith shows the power of established Anglicanism in South Carolina
and also its flexibility as he follows the ministry of Anglican
evangelical itinerant George Whitfield in the colony. Initial
confrontations between Whitefield and senior clergy were followed by a
more nuanced appropriation of the power of subjective religion by other
Anglicans, lay and ordained. Smith finds elements of mystical
evangelicalism in the lives of Christopher Gadsden and Henry Laurens,
sons of St. Philip's Church and members of the Anglican establishment.
All this happened before the evangelical revivals of the nineteenth
century, the era when scholars have located the emergence of a unifying
evangelical ethos for the South.

The book is necessary reading for scholars of the early South, of
southern religion, and of American evangelicalism. Students of political
theory in early America with an interest in religion will appreciate it
as well. It is decidedly a scholarly book, grappling ably with
spirituality across hundreds of years in Europe and America. While John
Wesley and George Whitefield will be familiar to non-specialists, Johann
Arndt and Johannes Tauler may not be. The book is a history of ideas and
religious affections; it traces their transmission and transformation,
from personal spirituality to group political conviction. Thus it is
rich and, at times, complex book.

*A Cautious Enthusiasm* is a deeply-researched and well-written volume
that makes an important contribution to the continuing scholarly revival
of the study of religion in early South Carolina.
