---
layout: article
title: "Review: A Cry for Justice"
author-first: James B.
author-last: Bennett
author: James B. Bennett
author-note: "James B. Bennett is an associate professor of Religious 
Studies at Santa Clara University."
vol: 15
year: 2013
book-reviewed: "Gary B. Agee. <em>A Cry for Justice: Daniel Rudd and His
Life in Black Catholicism, Journalism, and Activism, 1854&ndash;1933</em>.
Fayetteville: The University of Arkansas Press, 2011. xvi + 236 pp. ISBN 
978-1-55728-975-9."
---

When African American Catholics revived the National Black Catholic
Congress movement in the late twentieth century, they identified the
largely unknown Daniel Rudd (1854--1933) as their founder, despite the
century-long gap since the movement Rudd started had last met. Gary
Agee's biography of Rudd draws attention to this important figure, whose
work as an editor and activist is significant for those seeking to
understand the intersections of race and religion, especially
Catholicism, in the late nineteenth century. Rudd was an African
American Catholic, born into slavery in Kentucky in 1854. Rudd later
moved to Ohio, where founded and edited the *American Catholic Tribune*
(1886--1897), likely the largest and longest enduring newspaper for
nineteenth-century black Catholics. He also initiated the Colored
Catholic Congress movement, a national gathering of lay black Catholics
who met five times between 1889 and 1894. At the turn of the century,
after his newspaper failed and the Catholic Congresses ceased to meet,
Rudd moved south, first to Mississippi then to Arkansas, where he worked
as a manager for prominent black farmers. He made a brief speech at the
1919 NAACP convention, and then died in 1933 in Bardstown, KY, the same
town where he grew up. As an African American and Catholic who spent
much of his life in the Midwest, Rudd does not represent the typical
focus of studies of religion and race in late nineteenth America.
Nonetheless, as the sole editor of a widely circulated periodical and
initiator of a lay black Catholic movement, Rudd's story is an important
one that has received little scholarly attention. Agee's biography
begins to rectify that neglect.

Any biographer of Rudd faces a formidable challenge. The primary sources
are limited in number and in the personal details they disclose. They
consist of an incomplete run of Rudd's *American Catholic Tribune* (both
the earliest and final years are missing) and two books that Rudd
published: one detailing the first three Colored Catholic Congresses
(1893) and the other a biography of his employer, Scott Bond (1917).
None of the publications, nor the handful of extant records Agee has
uncovered, provide much information about Rudd. Most of the details of
Rudd's life remain unknown, including his whereabouts for more than a
decade after the collapse of the *American Catholic Tribune* in 1897. In
the absence of archival evidence, Agee often resorts to speculation to
fill the gaps in Rudd's life.

For most readers, the greatest strength of Agee's biography will be its
detailed summary of the contents of the *American Catholic Tribune*. The
many extended quotations reveal Rudd's religious and racial perspectives
and the means by which he hoped to achieve equality. Most importantly,
Rudd's advocacy for racial justice was rooted in his Catholic faith. He
insisted that Catholicism's universal claims and world-wide membership
offered the best hope for achieving equality for black citizens in the
United States. Agee also shows how Rudd's confidence in the Catholic
Church and his concern for equality led him to call for justice on a
variety of other issues, from labor and women's suffrage, to concern for
oppression in Africa and South America.

Yet, Rudd's faith was not blind to his Church's failures. In his
writing, speaking, and especially through the Colored Catholic Congress
movement, Rudd insisted the Catholic Church in the United States was not
beyond reproach for its failure to achieve racial justice and equality.
Inequities in education, both within parochial school and public
schools, were especially troubling for Rudd. The Colored Catholic
Congress movement (1889--1894) that Rudd helped found, was a forum in
which black Catholics could hold their church to account, even as they
professed their loyalty to it. Rudd insisted that even if Catholicism
was not perfect, it was still better than Protestantism, which Rudd
considered less prepared to challenge racial equality both theologically
and institutionally.

Agee's thorough examination of the *American Catholic Tribune* provides
access to a perspective that connected religious belief and racial
advocacy differently than African American Protestants in the South. The
accumulation of evidence, however, does not always constitute a clear
argument. Others will be able to build upon the evidence Agee provides
to investigate relevant contexts and comparisons that will identify the
extent to which Rudd was a distinctive and/or representative voice among
the intersecting circles of African Americans, Catholics, newspaper
editors, authors, and businessmen with whom he interacted. Rudd's work
as an independent, rather than officially church-supported editor, as
well as his membership in a racially mixed church, distinguished Rudd
from most other African American church editors. This unique locus
points to intriguing comparisons that could analyze Rudd and his black
Catholicism in a wider perspective, from his views and the content he
published to the financial instability that plagued the *American
Catholic Tribune*. These sorts of analyses will help fill the narrative
gaps of Rudd's life that will likely remain forever hidden.

We can be grateful that Agee's biography has introduced Rudd to a wider
audience. His voice, alongside the voices of other turn of the century
black Catholics, reveals an important but often overlooked dimension of
the complicated and contested relationship between religion and race in
American history.
