---
layout: article
title: "Review: American Evangelicals Today"
author-first: Todd M.
author-last: Brenneman
author: Todd M. Brenneman
author-note: "Todd M. Brenneman is an assistant professor of Christian 
History at Faulkner University."
vol: 15
year: 2013
book-reviewed: "Corwin E. Smidt. <em>American Evangelicals Today</em>. 
Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, 2013. 288 pp. ISBN 
978-1-44221-729-4."
---

A perennial issue in the historiography of American evangelicalism for
the past three decades has been the question of definition. What does
the term "evangelical" mean? Who are the people that could be identified
as "evangelical"? What do "evangelicals" believe and do? Corwin Smidt's
*American Evangelicals Today* seeks to address this seminal problem.
Additionally, Smidt, a professor emeritus in political science at Calvin
College, aspires to counteract misunderstanding and misinformation in
both scholarly and journalistic works. To do so, Smidt relies on the
results of the 2007 Pew Religious Landscape Survey, along with findings
from the Henry Institute National Survey on Religion and Public Life and
the University of Akron Survey Research Center's Fifth National Survey
of Religion and Politics.

After providing a broad survey of the history of evangelicalism in the
United States, Smidt examines various approaches to identifying
evangelicals. Ultimately he concludes that the most accurate way to
define evangelicals is by looking at "affiliation with particular
denominations and nondenominational congregations" (53). While other
scholars have defined evangelicalism in terms of certain religious
beliefs, by the claiming of a "born-again" experience, or by
self-identification, Smidt says the affiliation model provides "a
relatively powerful predictor of a variety of social and political
attitudes and behaviors" (54). It is unclear, however, what
denominations are in view here. He does not specifically identify them
but mentions in a footnote that they would be "denominations associated
with the National Association of Evangelicals" (236, note12).

In subsequent chapters, Smidt lays out various social and political
characteristics of evangelicals. He is interested in two general
questions: how do evangelicals compare to other Christian traditions on
social and political issues, and what kinds of differences exist among
evangelicals on those issues? Based on the previously mentioned surveys,
evangelicals make up about a quarter of the American population, tend to
have a higher percentage of males compared to other Christian groups,
are predominantly white, live in rural and suburban areas, and are more
likely to be located in the South. Evangelicals also tend to favor
limited government and often identify as politically conservative. But
they also are tolerant of political dissent and believe in the legal
equality of individuals. A majority of evangelicals (54%) have a
favorable view of the Tea Party, but only a smaller group (28%) actually
identifies as supporters of the Tea Party. Smidt also investigates
differences and similarities among evangelicals on the basis of racial,
educational, generational, and theological differences. While he finds
variations between evangelicals on a host of social, civil, and
political issues, the key characteristic that often marks the most
division is whether the respondent identifies as a traditionalist or
not.

*American Evangelicals Today* provides several important contributions.
First, it is a rather sizable empirical study that provides an expansive
look at evangelicals and complicates stereotypical views of who
evangelicals are and what they believe. Second, it presents evidence
that differences are emerging between older and younger evangelicals,
especially over issues like homosexuality. Finally, it demonstrates that
evangelicalism is still a vibrant tradition in the United States but one
that is poised for great change in the coming decades.

While Smidt's book comes across as a definitive observation of who
evangelicals are, there are several problems with the methodology and
sources that leave open many questions. Not all of these problems are
Smidt's fault; rather, they come from his source material. One of the
first issues is the classification of the various respondents to the
surveys. Because Smidt decided to draw on the affiliation model for
determining who is an evangelical, he binds himself to certain
classifications. So, he divides respondents into "evangelical
Protestant," "Mainline Protestant," "Black Protestant," "Roman
Catholic," and "unaffiliated." This leads to the observation that
"evangelical Protestants" are 81% white, 6% black, 7% Hispanic, 2%
Asian, and 4% "other." Yet, 35% of black Protestants affirmed that the
word "evangelical" described their religious perspective fairly or very
well. How does the affiliation model help us understand who
"evangelicals" are if individuals who identify as evangelical are
excluded from that determination?

The surveys that Smidt draws on are also more suggestive than definitive
and raise interesting questions that the methodology is unable to
answer. What, for example, does it tell us that 14% of evangelicals
apparently don't believe in heaven and 18% don't believe in hell? What
does it mean that only 80% of evangelicals view God as a person not as a
force? Yes, evangelicals tend to report believing in heaven, hell, and
God as a person more than other religious traditions or the
unaffiliated, but that a rather sizable portion of evangelicals would
not assert these things indicates something interesting to explore. Yet,
it is not discussed. Other information is perhaps less valuable. When
asked whether they believed only their own religion led to eternal life,
36% of evangelicals agreed with this statement. Even Smidt acknowledges,
however, that the respondent's frame of reference could skew this
result. So, does this 36% tell us that most evangelicals believe that
Hindus, Buddhists, Muslims, and others are on the path toward eternal
life? Or, does it tell us that evangelicals believe being a Baptist,
Roman Catholic, Presbyterian, etc., is irrelevant for reaching heaven?
Unfortunately, we cannot be sure.

The depth of demographics also fails in addressing all salient points.
There are several tables that compare the views of evangelicals who have
graduated college and those who have not. On most measures, evangelicals
who have graduated college tend to have more conservative ideas about
social and political issues. They also tend to be more connected to the
Republican Party. The opposite tends to be true about other religious
traditions. Among Mainline Protestants and Roman Catholics, for example,
education tends to be a marker for more progressive positions on issues
like abortion and homosexuality. But where are these evangelicals going
to college? It seems understandable that if a majority of the
evangelicals who have graduated college have attended evangelical
schools, then they would be more likely to hold traditionalist
positions. If, however, most evangelicals are graduating from secular
schools, this is a rather interesting development. This information,
however, is not available in the book.

Smidt's work is an important contribution to the continuing
historiography on evangelicalism. It should provide a foundation for
further explorations that can move beyond the questions of what
evangelicals believe and what their politics are in order to engage
other issues within this movement. It also reminds scholars that this
historiography must continue to be interdisciplinary so that we can do a
better job understanding a diverse movement of a sizable population of
individuals in the United States.
