---
layout: article
title: "Review: Spirit Cure"
author-first: Candy Gunther
author-last: Brown
author: Candy Gunther Brown
author-note: "Candy Gunther Brown is an associate professor of Religious 
Studies at Indiana University."
vol: 15
year: 2013
book-reviewed: "Joseph W. Williams. <em>Spirit Cure: A History of 
Pentecostal Healing</em>. New York: Oxford University Press, 2013. xiv+ 
222 pp. ISBN 978-0-19-976567-6."
---

*Spirit Cure* is a welcome addition to a burgeoning field of scholarship
on pentecostal divine healing. Two decades ago, few academics paid much
attention to spiritual healing practices. But then observers caught wind
of the extraordinary growth of pentecostalism as a global religious
movement. Scholars began to recognize that divine healing practices are
a characteristic feature of pentecostalism and, moreover, provide a
crucial explanation of the movement's success.

Prior to Joseph Williams, most scholars had restricted their purview to
pentecostalism's formative decades in the late nineteenth and early
twentieth century. *Spirit Cure* stands out in importance because it
traces the story all the way up to the 2000s. Whereas other books have
treated either pentecostal healing or metaphysical "nature cure"
movements, this book is distinctive in teasing out the complex
relationships among divine healing, modern medicine, and metaphysical
healing movements. Williams accurately notes in the introduction that
"the history of pentecostals' shifting attitudes toward more scientific
and natural healing methods provides a particularly valuable vantage
point for assessing pentecostals' evolving relationship to mainstream
U.S. culture" (1). Williams elaborates that he attempts to "straddle
sharp differentiations separating the 'pentecostal' from the
'metaphysical,'" demonstrating that "individuals representing them were
never quite as far apart as it may have appeared" (23). Indeed, one of
Williams's key contributions is in clarifying the nature and progression
of pentecostal interactions with other philosophies of healing.

The book is organized roughly chronologically, beginning in the
introduction by indicating nineteenth-century precursors of early
pentecostal healing theology and practice, and by outlining the contours
of metaphysical nature cures that arose in the same cultural context.
Chapter one examines the early twentieth century. Dissatisfied with
modernizing medicine---in part because of its materialistic theories and
unwanted side effects---pentecostals sometimes denounced metaphysical
healers as heretical, yet also felt drawn to their more "natural,"
spiritual, results-oriented approaches.

The book becomes ever more interesting as the chapters unfold and the
narrative increasingly features pentecostals who have received less
academic attention, and as Williams examines connections with, and
growing accommodation to, consumer and self-help, therapeutic culture.
Chapter two moves to the mid-twentieth century. Some pentecostals shed
their earlier anti-medical stance as they became more comfortably
situated within mainstream American culture. But the mid-century also
birthed new divine healing revivalists who reinforced pentecostals'
sense of conflict between divine and medical healing. Of note, some
mid-century pentecostals rejected modern medicine, yet "appropriated
unorthodox healing paradigms to articulate visions of healing that in
practical details differed little from certain forms of alternative
healing in their attempt to bring the power of natural substances and
the power of the mind into unity with divine power" (65). In addition to
borrowing from New Thought, pentecostals also became increasingly open
to spiritualized psychological approaches to healing. Chapter three
carries the story forward, considering rapprochements with medicine and
acceptance of developing holistic healing paradigms. Chapter four works
up to the 1980s, highlighting psychological, inner healing, and Word of
Faith approaches. Chapter five examines pentecostal appropriations of
metaphysical approaches to diet and exercise, and commodified
therapeutic cultures. The conclusion and epilogue consider where
pentecostalism is and is heading in the twenty-first century.

The book is thoroughly researched, logically organized, and clearly
written. It tells a fascinating story of linkages among diverse
approaches to healing. Its major accomplishment is in connecting
pentecostal (and especially denominational pentecostal) divine healing
practices with other medical and metaphysical healing practices
prominent in twentieth and twenty-first century American culture.

The book necessarily treats metaphysical healing with a broad brush. It
would be revealing---in future studies---to provide a more nuanced
discussion of similarities and differences among various alternative
therapies. It would also be fruitful to give further consideration to
how different pentecostals have addressed the theological questions
raised by integrating such diverse philosophies of healing.

The combinative practices observed by Williams are really quite
remarkable and merit additional explanation and analysis. To simplify,
modern medicine reflects a materialistic and monistic worldview focused
on the role of material factors in causing and treating disease.
Complementary and alternative medicine, or CAM, presumes a holistic and
monistic worldview in which material and spiritual factors lie along a
continuum and are of essentially the same substance. Pentecostal healing
expresses a holistic and dualistic worldview that gives play to
spiritual as well as material factors, but sharply distinguishes between
a personal Creator and that which is created.

From a holistic/monistic worldview, the fundamental human dilemma is
loss of harmony or blockage in the flow of universal, life-force energy
(sometimes referred to as *qi*, *ki*, *prana*, *vital force*, or *innate
intelligence*). Touch-oriented CAM healing practices involve the
manipulation of impersonal, spiritual energy to remove blockages and
restore harmony. From the holistic/dualistic worldview of pentecostal
Christianity, the human dilemma of broken relationship between humans
and God can only be reconciled through divine initiative and human
response. Prayer for healing often involves touch, but healing comes
through the power of the Holy Spirit in the name of Jesus, rather than
through human manipulation of impersonal spiritual energy. Integrating
such diverse concepts involves logical tensions that have received
relatively little attention either from pentecostals or the scholars who
study them. Williams makes an important start to deeper reflection and
analysis.

This book also raises questions about the repercussions of pentecostal
therapeutic combinations. Do pentecostals who employ medical and/or CAM
healing methods change their theologies as a result of their combinative
practices? Does participation in CAM change pentecostals' understanding
of who God is, who humans are, or how they relate? Sociological research
suggests that performance of symbolic bodily practices can affect
religious beliefs---and in particular that employing CAM techniques can
lead practitioners to embrace holistic/monistic worldviews. In
demonstrating the dense intermingling of therapeutic practices in
pentecostal practice and American culture, *Spirit Cure* invites further
study of the implications.

In sum, this is an excellent book that will be of interest to scholars
of pentecostalism and divine healing, and more broadly to those
interested in the history of modern medicine and complementary and
alternative medicine, and America's commercialized, therapeutic culture.
