---
layout: article
title: "Review: The Problem South"
author-first: Joe
author-last: Coker
author: Joe Coker
author-note: "Joe Coker is a lecturer in Religion at Baylor University."
vol: 15
year: 2013
book-reviewed: "Natalie J. Ring. <em>The Problem South: Region, Empire, 
and the New Liberal State, 1880-1930.</em> Athens: The University of 
Georgia Press, 2012. xiv + 334 pp. ISBN 978-0-82034-260-3."
---

Natalie Ring's *The Problem South* is an important new study of the
history of the New South era. It examines the growing chorus of voices
in both the North and South that called for reform and uplift of the
diseased, undereducated, and economically backwards southern states
during the period 1880 to 1930. The vigorous and sometimes vicious
criticism of the South famously flowed from northern writers such as H.
L. Mencken, and came from liberals in the South as well---both black and
white. These southern progressives agreed with their northern
counterparts that the South was a problematic region that was holding
back the nation. They emphasized that the unique problems of the South
must be addressed through federal intervention and the utilization of
social scientific approaches. And their solution for the "southern
problem" was to bring to the region the overall progress,
industrialization, modernization, and prosperity being experienced in
the rest of America.

Despite the optimism of the New South message, most Americans continued
to see the South as a place mired in tropical diseases and inefficient
economic patterns and populated by lazy, undereducated African Americans
and poor whites. What is unique about Ring's treatment of this chorus of
discontent is the connection she draws between it and the simultaneous
rise of imperialism and global commerce in America. She challenges the
more conventional view: that such calls for reform and uplift of the
South reflected a growing post-Reconstruction desire on the part of both
northerners and southerners to reunify the nation, and that this desire
for reunification led to myth-making about both the Civil War and the
romanticized antebellum South in order to smooth the transition back
into a reunified nation. Instead, Ring prompts us to look at the New
South era discussion of the "problem south" and the reform efforts of
the period through the lens of post-colonialism.

Ring's convincing argument proceeds by examining the popular image of
the South as a region riddled with disease, especially tropical diseases
such as ringworm, pellagra, and yellow fever, which provoked comparisons
between the South and tropical, colonial regions like Cuba, Puerto Rico,
and the Philippines. This reinforced Americans' perception of the region
as being distinct from the rest of the industrialized nation and a drain
upon the nation's overall productivity and progress. Reformers shaped a
rationale for government intervention around this narrative, stressing
the need for a strong, healthy workforce brought together by corporate
America and philanthropic social outreach efforts. Ring continues by
examining critiques of the southern economy's over-emphasis upon cotton
production. While the South's cotton helped fuel the growth of America's
manufacturing industry, it was also viewed as a threat to the well-being
of both the region and the nation. Reformers advocated a more
diversified and modernized economy, one more aligned with the overall
trajectory of America's economic progress in the era. Additionally, Ring
looks at the rising concern over the issue of poor whites in the South.
Many northern and southern critics of the New South campaigned against
the crop lien system, child labor, and other practices that were seen to
contribute to the disproportionately high numbers of poor and illiterate
whites in the southern states.

*The Problem South* is certain to have an impact on southern studies.
Ring's efforts to place discussions about the South's problems within
the context of American global expansion and colonialism, shifts and
expands our understanding of the New South. Historians of southern
religion will be disappointed that she does not do more with religion in
her study. Aside from a few fleeting appearances of Christian leaders
such as Atticus Haygood, Andrew Sledd, and Warren Candler, Ring does
little to explore the role of religious voices in the discussions of the
"problem south." Historians interested in religion in the South will
nonetheless find Ring's new work compelling and illuminating and will
hopefully feel challenged to test Ring's post-colonial interpretation of
New South reform efforts by examining religious critiques of the region
in a new way. Did religious progressives pushing for moral, educational,
social, and health reform in the South, for instance, simultaneously
promote a similar agenda on colonial mission fields? Was the rhetoric
used to describe the needs of such foreign mission fields the same used
when describing the problems facing the southern states? Did they view
the southern states, as Ring suggests, as a foreign country? Despite the
lack of emphasis on religion and religious leaders, Natalie Ring
provides a promising new lens through which to view the minority
movement of progressives in the South who, instead of touting the moral
superiority of the region, called attention to its social, economic, and
moral shortcomings.
