---
layout: article
title: "Review: The Politics of Faith During the Civil War"
author-first: Robert
author-last: Elder
author: Robert Elder
author-note: "Robert Elder is an assistant professor of History at Tabor 
College."
vol: 15
year: 2013
book-reviewed: "Timothy L. Wesley. <em>The Politics of Faith During the Civil War</em>. Baton
Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 2013. 320 pp. ISBN
978-0-80715-000-9."
---

Until quite recently the significance of religion in America's Civil War
attracted nothing like the interest historians show in arguing over the
influence of religion on the Revolution. As George Rable noted in his
*God's Almost Chosen People* (2010), most sweeping narratives of the war
note religion only in passing, an omission that mid-nineteenth century
Americans would have found striking. In the last decade, however, books
by Rable, Mark Noll, and others, have done much to make up this
deficiency, revealing the United States' crisis of national identity as
also a theological crisis. Timothy L. Wesley's useful new study examines
the ways in which the clergy, laity, denominational bodies, and national
authorities, responded when a minister addressed civil and political
issues from behind the sacred desk. This narrow focus represents a
welcome addition to a field in which it would be easy to conclude that
religion was simply in the Civil War era ether---everywhere and nowhere
at the same time.

Most northerners who attended church in the antebellum era agreed that
the clergy should concern themselves with the City of God and leave the
City of Man to run itself. Abolitionist or anti-slavery sermons were
nearly universally condemned as uniquely and egregiously "political" in
the 1830s and 1840s. It took the Mexican-American War and the events of
the 1850s to inaugurate what Wesley calls "a new age of political
preaching" (11). Many northern preachers agreed with Congregationalist
Leonard Bacon, who pronounced after the 1854 Kansas-Nebraska Act that
slavery was now "a question for the pulpit, unless the pulpit itself is
to be dishonored and enslaved" (18). Yet there were conservative clergy
in the North who, while no supporters of slavery or the hated
Kansas-Nebraska Bill, still thought that the use of the pulpit for
political harangues was a violation of their ministerial role.
Meanwhile, Wesley writes that "Janus-faced" southern clergy of the same
era decried northern "political preaching" while stoutly defending
slavery and the southern way of life from the pulpit on the grounds that
it was a matter of domestic, not political, concern.

In the North, the onset of the war meant that the clergy enjoyed
increased prominence as their flocks searched for guidance during
difficult times; but it also meant increased scrutiny from all quarters,
as northerners increasingly conflated Christianity with the Union cause,
leaving little room for even the most conscientious dissent. In this
atmosphere, political affiliation became a litmus test for religious
sincerity. In 1863 a loyal Methodist clergyman voiced the common opinion
that a "Copperhead cannot be a Christian; and he who is not a Christian
is not a proper person to preach the Gospel" (73).

The story of the Lincoln administration's suppression of civil liberties
during the war is well known to historians, but Wesley details how often
this effort was aimed at the suppression of the pulpit, especially in
border states. In 1863, for instance, Secretary of War Edwin Stanton
ordered that all the Methodist churches in the vicinity of St. Louis be
confiscated and placed under the authority of loyal Methodist Bishop
Edward Ames (68). In many border states, and even in states such as New
York, Pennsylvania, and Ohio, ministers who either opposed the Union or
simply refused to support it from the pulpit were arrested and
imprisoned. In an 1863 letter, President Lincoln avowed that "the U.S.
government must not undertake to run the churches," and yet in the same
letter he warned, "When an individual, in a church or out of it, becomes
dangerous to the public interest...he must be checked" (70).

And yet it was not only the Lincoln administration and the Army that
suppressed disloyal preachers. Wesley expands this traditional narrative
to show how these ministers also faced "the censure of their fellow
ministers and denominational officers, the estrangement of their local
congregants, and the disparagement of the secular public, as well" (60).
Between 1860 and 1865, Wesley documents 121 ministers who were brought
before Methodist annual conference meetings in Illinois, Indiana, and
Ohio, on charges of disloyalty, adding a new axis to our understanding
of dissent and the suppression of civil liberties during the war.

In one of the most interesting sections of the book, Wesley divides
northern clerical positions on the relationship between religion and
politics during the war into three categories. "Separate Sphere" clergy
in the North believed that the religious and the political should remain
strictly separate (95). Other northern clergy, whom Wesley labels
"Separate Duty," acknowledged the imperative to address political issues
from the pulpit in a general sense, while insisting that the work of
advocating specific positions belonged to the political sphere (105). A
third group, epitomized by abolitionist firebrand Henry Ward Beecher,
Wesley calls "Separate Component" preachers. These clergy viewed their
religious and political proclamations as part of the same Christian
project and practiced the "unconditional commingling of religious and
political concerns" (111). Perhaps most surprising is Wesley's finding
that these categories did not necessarily correspond to denominational
boundaries. "Within virtually every Christian tradition," he writes,
"were individuals who both sought to honor the dictates of their
denominational creed and live honorably in a national beset by threats
to its very existence" (121).

In contrast to their northern counterparts, according to Wesley, the
southern clergy's combination of religion and politics required no
complicated taxonomy. In a chapter on the Confederate clergy, Wesley
covers well-trod ground, writing that "loyalty to the church and to the
nation became so interchangeable that in most parts of the South to
hesitate in one's support of the Confederacy was to court the reproach
of the church" (127). Portraying the Confederate ministry as more or
less unified, Wesley's argument leaves little room for Bruce T.
Gourley's *Divergent Loyalties* (2012), a study of Baptists in Georgia
that found a variety of attitudes towards the war within a single
denomination in a single state.

Wesley interestingly details the challenges faced by clergy living in
occupied areas, both Union and Confederate, during the war. "Federal
policy made virtually no distinction between disloyal northern and
Confederate churches," Wesley explains. Nevertheless, he finds that "on
a practical level...the consequences were visited on southern churches
alone" (146). Wesley also details ministerial support for the storied
resistance of southern women in occupied areas, another way in which the
unique link between female congregants and their ministers was pressed
into service during the war. Yet while southern churches and ministers
sometimes suffered at the hands of Union forces, Wesley's account makes
clear that the worst thing to be was an outspoken Unionist minister in
contested Confederate territory. In 1863, a Tennessee Unionist Methodist
minister had his ears cut off and was clubbed to death. The same year,
"Rebel partisans" in Tennessee murdered the Rev. Levi Carter and his son
and delivered the son's eyeballs to a local woman as a prize. In
contrast to the carefully calibrated mixtures of religion and politics
found in the north, then, in occupied territory the combination of
religion and politics could be deadly.

Finally, Wesley details the contributions of black church leaders to the
debate over religion and politics during the war. African-American
clergy, mostly associated with the African Methodist Episcopal Church,
mixed religion and politics as a matter of course, writes Wesley,
wielding considerable influence within their communities. Many of the
black clergy preached messages of "racial uplift" and moral improvement,
but Wesley finds in these messages not a craven desire to win the favor
of white power or a tacit admission of black inferiority, but a genuine
desire to prepare their congregants for the coming of freedom and the
civil equality they assumed would follow. And yet, just like their white
counterparts, the African-American clergy was divided, especially on
important issues such as colonization and military service. Finally,
unlike their white counterparts, Wesley notes that black preachers
retained their engagement with and authority in the political sphere
well into the post-war era.

Wesley's book is a fine contribution to our understanding of religion
and the Civil War, and to our understanding of the clergy's place in
that struggle. I have only two observations that might qualify as
critiques. First, despite a tighter focus than some other recent works
on religion and the war, the book still attempts to cover quite a lot of
ground, some of it quite complicated, leading at times to a tendency
toward summary rather than analysis. Accordingly, the reader will long
for more differentiation and nuance than Wesley's scope allows. Related
to this is the tendency to rely heavily on secondary sources. Works of
synthesis are important and valuable, especially when they advance new
and important interpretations of material that had previously not been
pieced together in a useful way. At its best, Wesley's account of
"political preachers" in the Civil War does just this. The chapter on
Confederate clergy, however, leaves the historiographical contribution
unclear. Nevertheless, the book is a worthy addition to the bookshelf of
any scholar trying to understand religion's role in the Civil War, or
the ways in which wars always seem to fuse religion and politics
together, often with tragic consequences.
