---
layout: article
title: "Review: The Rise to Respectability"
author-first: Curtis J.
author-last: Evans
author: Curtis J. Evans
author-note: "Curtis J. Evans is an assistant professor of the History 
of Christianity at the University of Chicago Divinity School."
vol: 15
year: 2013
book-reviewed: "Calvin White, Jr. <em>The Rise to Respectability: Race, Religion, and the Church of God in Christ</em>. Fayetteville: The University of Arkansas Press, 2012. xii + 190 pp. ISBN 978-1-55728-977-3."
---

Our knowledge of African American religious life during the late
nineteenth and early twentieth century, especially in that vast region
known as the Mississippi Delta, continues to deepen as new works explore
its varied and different dimensions. More specifically, the origins and
growth of Holiness movements and Pentecostalism in the South has been
documented by a number of scholars from the work of William E.
Montgomery's *Under Their Own Vine and Fig Tree: The African-American
Church in the South, 1865-1900* (1993) to John Giggie's *After
Redemption: Jim Crow and the Transformation of African American Religion
Delta, 1875-1915* (2008). Calvin White's *Rise to Respectability* adds
to this rich literature, providing a moving account of the early battles
of Charles Harrison Mason and the Church of God in Christ (COGIC) in the
court system over church property and money, fierce debates about racial
uplift and sanctification, and disagreements about the role and
responsibilities of Christians in a time of war. Grant Wacker's *Heaven
Below: Early Pentecostals and American Culture* (2001) reminded us over
a decade ago how the primitivist impulse within early Pentecostalism was
tempered by more pragmatic and prosaic concerns. One finds clear
evidence of this tension in White's book, particularly his chapter on
Mason and other COGIC leaders quibbling in court about property
ownership and whether or not sanctification was a false doctrine. Though
COGIC members may have longed for the fullness of spiritual gifts as
they searched scriptural passages such as I Corinthians 12, more often
they had to deal with more quotidian and less lofty pursuits as Paul's
admonition (in I Corinthians 6) not to take each other to civil courts
(places that Mason found himself in more often than he would have
liked).

The "rise to respectability" is the overarching theme of White's
narrative. The story he details is well known, but its highlights are
the following: Mason and other leaders of what became COGIC were deeply
disillusioned with denominationalism; they engaged in heated debates
about black religious traditions that were rooted in slavery, leading to
fierce disagreements among younger, educated and progressive clergymen
who wanted a more dignified religious expression over against Mason and
his followers; these early holiness leaders like Mason and Charles Price
Jones rejected the modernization of black religious practices and gained
widespread support from rural uneducated blacks in Arkansas,
Mississippi, and Tennessee. Somewhere along the way (and here the
narrative becomes less compelling and quite incomplete), COGIC itself
developed into a respectable mainstream black denomination. Ironically,
COGIG became a denomination despite the founders' disdain for
denominationalism (28). White also asserts that COGIC's missionary work
in parts of Africa emphasized uplift and respectability and engaged in a
major critique of African religious and cultural practices, another
ironic development for White because it was reminiscent of white
critiques of black southern religion as uncouth and uncivilized, and
even those of black middle class Baptist and Methodist clergy who
excoriated the "excesses" of holiness and Pentecostalism among blacks in
the South (93).

Respectability has become a much used explanatory category, made
prominent and illuminating by Evelyn Brooks Higginbotham's *Righteous
Discontent: The Women's Movement in the Black Baptist Church, 1880-1920*
(1993). For Higginbotham, middle class black Baptist women espoused a
"politics of respectability" that was inflected along lines of class and
status. It allowed black women to condemn what they perceived to be the
negative practices and attitudes among poorer blacks in the South,
motivating them to engage in educational projects among poorer black
women and campaigns to elevate their morals and manners. The outward
dimension of this politics of respectability aimed at conforming blacks'
values and manners to the dominant (white) society's norms. Higginbotham
is emphatic that we should not regard this as "an accomdationationist
stance toward racism, or a compensatory ideology in the face of
powerlessness" (187). While she argues that black women did not escape
the influence of dominant societal norms, which cast blacks as
emotional, uncivilized, and in need of uplift, these church women
vigorously protested social injustice and circumscriptions against
themselves in churches and in the broader society. Yet, the concept of
respectability is not often treated with this kind of nuance in later
works. In White's book, respectability seems entirely a negative
expression which describes either conscious or unwitting capitulation on
the part of COGIC to dominant negative images and perceptions of black
Americans. Respectability is the equivalent of wholesale adoption of
Western values. For example, White argues in his discussion of COGIC
missionary activity: "In essence, COGIC, to a large degree, had adopted
the values of as well as religious standards of Western behavior" (86).
One wonders how or if White's work addresses Anthea Butler's *Women in
the Church of God in Christ: Making a Sanctified World* (2007)
contention that it was black women's belief in God and their reading of
scripture that led them to emphasize piety, purity, and manners.
Scholarship has not done a good job of teasing out these distinctions
very carefully. There has been a tendency to render respectability in an
all or nothing dichotomy, whereby whiteness so haunts the black
imagination that any attempt to propose uplift, etiquette, or manners is
seen as an ancillary part of religious education and inculcation and
thus a capitulation to the ethnocentrism and racism of Western values.
But can we so easily delineate, as White does, "values" from "religious
standards" of Western culture? Are impossible standards being imposed
upon oppressed historical actors situated in a particular culture when
historians seemingly operate under the notion that deportment of the
body, decorum, and recommendations for etiquette can be demarcated
neatly from religious practices and standards?

Although White's work is tied together by his attention to
respectability, the narrative is too incomplete and inconclusive to bear
the weight of its major assertion about the origins and development of
respectability among COGIC. The Emmett Till murder, the sanitation
workers' strike, and a few other nationally renowned events are treated
insufficiently as causative factors in the rise of COGIC to
respectability (here one thinks that public notice is the same as
respectability for White). The hasty treatment of these events and the
ambiguous relationship that they have to actual changes within the
denomination should give the reader pause as to whether they tell us
what White asserts they do. The general narrative does provide a basic
timeline of the growth of COGIC and some of its major public struggles.
What is not convincing to this reviewer is that respectability is
appropriately defined or that it is the most compelling way to chart
this change in this rapidly growing denomination. Even so, White's
narrative, with its attention to the multiple fractures with black
Christianity, should certainly be added to those works that conclusively
demonstrate that there is no good reason to continue using such an empty
and generalized expression as "the black church."
