---
layout: article
title: "Review: Democracy in Twenty-First Century America"
author-first: Glenn
author-last: Feldman
author: Glenn Feldman
author-note: "Glenn Feldman is a professor of History at University of 
Alabama at Birmingham."
vol: 15
year: 2013
book-reviewed: "Ronald B. Neal. <em>Democracy in Twenty-First Century 
America: Race, Class, Religion, and Region</em>. Macon, GA: Mercer 
University Press, 2012. xiv + 138 pp. ISBN 978-0-88146-286-9."
---

In this brief but interesting book Ronald B. Neal offers a philosophical
and religious meditation on the current state of democracy in early 21st
century America. He concentrates on the "two Americas" that he believes
were brought so dramatically into view in 2005 through the television
coverage of Hurricane Katrina and its aftermath. The book focuses on
South Carolina as a microcosm for the South and the nation writ large.

Neal is especially interested in, and moved by, the plight of what he
calls "America's least wanted"---poor blacks in urban and rural locales
who have not profited by the political and social reforms of the modern
civil rights era, have not made it into the black middle class, and who
have only the most grim and dire prospects for the future in terms of
education, work, life, and progress. The implications for the
prospering---or even the survival of---genuine democracy in America are
thus profoundly troubling to Neal. The tragedy is all the more
considerable because Neal rightly detects that there is now "a silent
and prevailing consensus that racial and economic inequality are no
longer priorities for the United States; that the political achievements
of the civil rights era have been sufficient in addressing the legacies
of slavery, Jim Crow, and a generation of racialized poverty" (xiii).

Drawing extensively on the remarkable life and thought of black
religious progressive and educator Benjamin E. Mays, the author focuses
on education and economic problems in South Carolina (Mays's state and
Neal's adopted state) to call for reforming democracy and race relations
along the lines of the reconstructions that followed the Civil War and
World War II. Neal believes that only by fully integrating the concept
of economic development and true educational and class opportunity for
all based on the ethics associated with Benjamin Mays's progressive
religion and earlier traditions of the social gospel can American
democracy be saved.

Given all of this, it is surprising that there is no discussion of
Michael Harrington's groundbreaking *The Other America* (1962)---which
did so much to alert Americans to the existence of two Americas---and no
reference to Thomas Jefferson's oft-quoted dictum that education is the
lifeblood of democracy.

Still, the American South is profoundly important for Neal as he
believes the region is (and has been) quite distinctive and
disproportionately influential in the course of American
history---whether dominated by the Virginia Dynasty, the Jeffersonian
and Jacksonian periods, the Civil War and Reconstruction, or the last
few decades in particular. Nor has this southern influence been,
especially of late, for the betterment of the country---particularly
when it comes to persistent social apathy and disdain for the largely
invisible poor. Much as C. Vann Woodward feared in 1951 for Dixie, Neal
fears the corrosive residue of an elite-dominated worldview and
mentalit√©. As the author perceptively understands, the "values and
attitudes that dominate the South have affected American life, including
attitudes toward the least advantaged members of society" (7). Democrats
do not get off scot-free---especially the more conservative post-1960s
Democrats of the Democratic Leadership Council (DLC) type. But it is
clear that the Republicanization of the South is the larger culprit for
Neal. In fact, in a section titled "From Dixiecrats to Southern
Republicans," Neal laments the obvious and bitter irony of the closing
decades of the twentieth century: "the manner in which conservative
southern politicians reinvented themselves, becoming the dominant force
in American politics" (111).

Neal is to be thanked for an interesting and provocative meditation that
evaluates current and recent events in the light of informed historical
developments, submerged and largely forgotten religious traditions, and
political and ethical theory.
