---
layout: article
title: "<em>The Master-Word</em>: Lily Hardy Hammond and the Social Gospel in the South"
author-first: Elna C.
author-last: Green
author: Elna C. Green
author-note: "Elna C. Green is the Associate Dean in the College of Humanities and the Arts at San José State University."
vol: 15
year: 2013
---

In the spring of 1905, the Macmillan Company announced the publication
of a new novel: "Published this Day, L.H. Hammond's novel *The
Master-Word* is an interesting story of present-day life in the
phosphate counties of Tennessee. It is full of tense situations turning
on the relations of races. But while the author writes as one who knows
the difficulties, its tone is full of hopefulness, its atmosphere
suggestive of Tennessee's own 'golden fall.'"[^1] A second ad, published
a few weeks later, again noted the "present-day relations of the races,"
but this time highlighted "a love-story as charming as the surroundings
in which it is set—Tennessee's own golden fall."[^2] The ads seem
designed to obscure the most controversial parts of the novel, with its
interracial relationship and its not-so-tragic mulatta, and instead to
direct potential buyers to think of the book as part of the "local
color" genre popular with American readers at the turn of the century.
The positive tones ("hopefulness," "charming," "golden") belied the
content, which included labor conflict, marital infidelity, violence,
and racism. The ads also seem worded carefully to conceal the sex of the
author, while still granting the book the imprimatur of an insider's
knowledge.[^3]

Reviewers of *The Master-Word* were not fooled by the advertising, and
most of them immediately honed in on the main issue: the mixed-race
central character and the interracial relationship that had produced
her. The *Independent* noted that "The initial situation is not
attractive, but it has much truth. And the book is worthy of attention
because it is the first compassionate, intelligent interpretation ever
written by any white person, North or South, of that pathetic class of
men and women who suffer the loneliness and humiliation of a peculiar
condition."[^4] The *Christian Advocate* wrote: "The painful and
ever-present problem of the mulatto is dealt with by the author with
great delicacy and power."[^5] Most reviewers, from whatever region of
the country, similarly made the interracial theme central in their
comments and largely ignored the "charming" love story.

*The Master-Word* was Lily Hardy Hammond's first novel, but not her
first piece of published fiction. She had previously published at least
two short stories and several poems in significant national venues.[^6]
Those works had focused primarily on "the woman question," and had
presented Hammond's reflections on the psychology of marriage. But,
while contemporary marriage was still one of her themes, *The
Master-Word* represented a bold departure from her previous work. The
subject matter was, as contemporaries frequently phrased it, "delicate."
Written during the nadir of race relations in the South, when lynching
rates were peaking and Jim Crow was settling rapidly across the land,
*The Master-Word* dove deep into controversial political territory.
Indeed many readers thought she had gone too far—even the *New York
Times* found the topic so repulsive that it might have been better left
untold.[^7]

But Lily Hammond was only just getting started. The 1905 novel was
followed by dozens of other publications—both fiction and
non-fiction—through which Hammond carved out a place for herself as the
spokeswoman of the Progressive-Era South's more liberal white reformers.
For almost two more decades, Hammond would use her typewriter to poke
and prod the conscience of the white South, especially its evangelical
Christians. Active in many organizations that were considered
progressive on racial issues, she came to be recognized as one of the
region's experts on race relations and could be found as a speaker at
most important meetings and conferences on race during the period. She
was an activist in women's voluntary organizations, an intellectual
widely read in social welfare literature, and a "renaissance" woman who
published fiction and non-fiction, both prose and poetry. Throughout
these twenty years of activism, Hammond insisted that southern white
women were the key to improving race relations in the region. Looking
back from this perspective then, *The Master-Word* appears to be an
important turning point in her career of literary activism. But the book
has been out of print for years and scholars have yet to publish any
analysis of it.

This essay turns attention to Hammond's long-neglected novel, placing it
in the context of the southern literary tradition and, more importantly,
grounding it in the southern social gospel movement. It argues that Lily
Hammond hoped to harness the power of the social gospel to improve race
relations in the twentieth-century South. The novel intended to inspire
southern white women to follow its lead, and provided a female
protagonist to serve as a role model. In later works, such as *In Black
and White*, Hammond would articulate even more strongly her conviction
that the South could never solve its other social and political problems
while ignoring the racial injustice that was related to so many of those
other problems, and that women must lead the way. *The Master-Word* was
much more than a charming love story, a local color portrait of the
Tennessee phosphate country, or even an early entrant in the southern
literary renaissance. Hammond's novel stood as a piece of nuanced
propaganda for the social gospel movement.

## The Social Gospel Movement as Context

The social gospel emerged in the 1880s as a movement within Christianity
that responded to the changing social and economic landscape of the
United States during the so-called Gilded Age. Massive immigration, the
developing industrial conglomerates, rapid urbanization, and more
visible class stratification produced new social tensions that greatly
troubled the native-born, white, middle classes. Their responses were
varied and from all sides of the political spectrum: immigration
restriction and disfranchisement, settlement houses and child saving,
single-taxers and socialism. Many of these efforts coalesced into a
larger, interconnected set of movements and activists that came to
identify themselves as "progressives," although the label suggests a
more singular ideology than was accurate.[^8]

Inspired from the beginning by religious writers, many progressives
accepted without question the centrality of religion, churches, and the
faithful in their many causes. "Social Christianity," "liberal
Christianity," and the "Social Gospel" were all contemporary labels for
the wing of religious activism that accompanied and contributed to the
overall progressive movement. Unlike more traditional evangelical
Protestantism, which focused on converting individuals, the new social
Christianity took the salvation of society as a whole as its mission.
Advocates of the social gospel argued that creating a just, peaceful,
and humane world would bring about the Kingdom of God on earth, even if
all its residents had not yet been saved. To these writers and
reformers, it was more important to provide safe, healthy environments
and to focus activism on economic justice than it was to convert
individual sinners away from gambling or drinking. The social gospel
asked Christians to think about the ways in which social and economic
structures, not just individuals, could be redeemed from sin. Social
institutions can become sources of injustice, greed, and vice, and the
social gospel was a national movement to bring about a just society, or
as Walter Rauschenbusch termed it, "Christianize the Social Order."
Supporting major progressive reforms such as organized labor,
prohibition, and an expanding social welfare state, the social gospel
might be seen as the religious wing of progressivism.[^9] While national
in scope, the social gospel was a movement with which individuals
primarily engaged in their local communities.[^10]

Scholars have debated how best to understand the social gospel movement
in America. Some have depicted it as so multifaceted as not to
constitute a movement at all, but rather a network of movements. Some
have emphasized its more radical nature, more "socialist" than social.
Others have pointed out the relationship between the religiosity of the
social gospel and the academic discipline of sociology.[^11] Up until
quite recently, historians generally agreed that southerners appeared
less open to the social gospel movement than were other Americans. And
while it is accurate to say that few southerners ranked among the
leadership of the national movement, nevertheless many in the region
embraced the ideals of "civic righteousness" in this era of rising
progressive sentiment. Charles S. Gardner was a professor of religion
and sociology at the Southern Baptist Theological Seminary, and the
author of a social gospel text, *The Ethics of Jesus and Social
Progress* (1914). Edgar Gardner Murphy and Alexander J. McKelway are
probably the best known social gospel figures from the region. Southern
Methodists in particular were drawn to this movement for a social
Christianity.[^12]

Indeed some historians have begun to undercover a larger social gospel
presence in the South than previously believed, as they have looked
beyond the most visible ministers and theologians such as Gardner,
Murphy, and McKelway. Evidence of a broader social gospel movement,
which included African Americans and women, can be found in less
well-known (and often unpublished) sources: annual reports of women's
missionary societies, unpublished accounts from social workers, and
other non-ministerial activities. Mary Agnes Dougherty has argued that
the "essence of social Christianity" involved carrying out the gospel,
not theorizing about it. And it was in the ranks of the activists where
women were to be found in larger numbers.[^13]

Scholars have also begun to look beyond the white churches to find
additional evidence of a social gospel presence in the South.[^14]
African-American churches began to open day care centers, homes for the
elderly, employment bureaus, and night classes. Black ministers in
larger cities, such as Henry Hugh Proctor of Atlanta, Sutton Griggs of
Memphis, and John Milton Waldron of Jacksonville, Florida, led the
movement to create socially active churches. African-American
churchwomen, such as Lucy Craft Laney, Lugenia Burns Hope, and Nannie
Helen Burroughs, all carried out their commitment to a Christian society
through both religious and secular organizations.[^15] Although no
historian has gone so far as to claim that the social gospel dominated
southern Protestantism, in the wake of recent scholarship it is clear
that more southerners—black and white—welcomed and advocated for a new
social Christianity than we once thought.

The lack of concern that the social gospel movement demonstrated
regarding race relations undoubtedly facilitated its movement into the
South. The social gospel emerged at a time when the nativist movements
were gaining strength in the United States, and some activists seemed to
blend the two with ease. Lyman Abbott supported American intervention in
Cuba in 1898, believing it would be an opportunity to bring liberal
Christianity to the island.[^16] Most (in)famously, Josiah Strong argued
that Anglo-Saxons were the chosen people and America was the chosen
place for the coming Kingdom of God on Earth. America's Christians had
an obligation to spread their high ideals to the rest of the world.[^17]
Few social gospel advocates were as outspoken as Strong, but few were
interested in adopting racial equality as part of their agenda either.
The most definitive statement of the precepts of the social gospel, the
Social Creed of the Churches (adopted in 1908 by the Federal Council of
Churches), avoided explicit commentary about race.[^18]

Historian Paul Harvey has argued that southern social gospel supporters
did not ignore race relations entirely, but they were never able to
reach a consensus on how to handle "the Negro question." For most
southern white reformers, the solution was to focus their energies on
helping poor whites, and hope that better educated whites would treat
their black neighbors more equitably.[^19] Otherwise, most southern
supporters of the social gospel remained silent on matters of race.
Presbyterian theologian Walter L. Lingle, for example, never discussed
segregation, inequality, or lynching as concerns of the social gospel
although he was a leading southern proponent of the movement.[^20]
Eventually Lily Hammond would emerge as one of the few southern white
progressives unwilling to accept that passive, "trickle-down," approach
to race relations. By the 1910s, she would come to insist on a more
activist agenda, which would be carried out by more ecumenical
organizations such as the Southern Sociological Congress and the Young
Women's Christian Association.

## The New South as Context

One could argue that immigration, urbanization, and industrialization
did less to disrupt social relations in the late-nineteenth-century
South than did the Civil War, Reconstruction, emancipation, and the
emergence of sharecropping as a labor system. Regardless of the degree
of causation, the end result was similar: by the turn-of-the-century,
many native-born middle-class southern whites were appalled and unnerved
at what they saw around them. Like their peers in northern and
midwestern cities, they began to form organizations and movements to
address the problems of what had quickly come to be called the New
South. The sudden boom in textile manufacturing caused southern
progressives to focus on child labor and women workers, and to lobby for
age restrictions, hours limitations, and other protective labor laws.
The deepening poverty of sharecroppers (black and white) and the highly
visible rural poverty in general concerned health reformers and
educators, who organized public health campaigns and public school
crusades. The growth of urban industrial centers, such as Birmingham and
Richmond, generated numerous social, cultural, and political stresses,
and in response urban dwellers of both sexes formed clubs, founded
asylums, and built other institutions. Thanks in part to the growing
national media, southern activists quickly came to identify with others
elsewhere engaged in their same causes. Reading essays and articles in
*Harper's*, *The Outlook*, and *Charities and the Commons*, southerners
from the tenements of Chicago could still see themselves as part of a
national settlement house movement, or a national prohibition effort, or
a national anti-tuberculosis campaign.[^21]

Historians have long debated how "progressive" the southern branch of
the movement was, or how "southern" it might have been. It is not my
intention to return to that particular discussion here. But for purposes
of understanding Lily Hammond's work and the place of the social gospel
in the South, it is important to understand the centrality of race as a
complication for the progressive movements in the region. Quick to play
the race card in opposition to any threatening political, social,
scientific, or cultural innovation, southern white conservatives wielded
tremendous direct power and indirect influence throughout the region.
Reformers who wish to open free kindergartens, offer home care by
visiting nurses, provide mothers' pensions, train social workers, and
any number of other initiatives found themselves on the defensive
against charges that their plans would endanger white supremacy or
challenge the racial status quo. Most southern progressives felt they
had little choice but to segregate their services or provide them to
whites only. And when separate, the services often had to appear to be
clearly unequal as well.[^22]

This Jim Crow progressivism had the effect of reducing the potential
impact of reforms by significantly diluting them. Providing two sets of
public schools, for example, was more expensive and thus reduced the
amount spent on both white children and black children. It also created
space for African-American reformers to create their own institutions to
fill the needs left unmet by discriminatory social welfare systems.
Black women's clubs raised funds to operate separate "reformatories" for
black youth; black churches conducted day nurseries for working mothers;
black nurses served the public health clinics in black neighborhoods.
African-American church workers, clubwomen, and professionals often
worked in a separate, parallel universe of progressive activism.
Sometimes labeled "racial uplift" rather than progressivism, black
reform activism nevertheless took its place underneath the large
umbrella of progressivism.[^23]

White Southerners who worked on behalf of progressive causes frequently
found themselves working directly with African-American reformers, and
for some white reformers the experience proved enlightening. Even as
they had to defend their reforms against attacks by white conservatives
who tried to label their efforts as threats to white supremacy, southern
white progressives learned new respect for their black middle-class
counterparts. White reformers found it to be a difficult balancing act,
working with and on behalf of their black neighbors while simultaneously
arguing that they were not challenging the racial status quo. A small
number of southern whites found the cognitive dissonance to be
intolerable, and they began more openly interracial work such as with
the Urban League, the YWCA, or the NAACP.

## The Author as Activist

One such southern white activist was Lily Hammond. Hammond has yet to
receive much biographic attention, thanks in good measure to the absence
of known family papers or other archival holdings. What little we know
of her life can be quickly summarized. Lily Hardy was born in 1859, to
parents who both were from slaveholding families but who had relocated
to the North on the eve of the Civil War. Her father, Henry G. Hardy,
worked as a stock broker and, by the time of the 1870 census, had moved
the family to Clarkstown, New York, just north of New York City. Few
details have surfaced about her childhood, other than the fact that she
was educated at the prestigious Packer Institute in Brooklyn, which
today describes itself as "the preeminent school for girls for much of
the latter 19th century."[^24] The historical record does not clarify
whether Lily ever attended college. Even without higher education she
was clearly well read, and her writings are filled with references to a
wide range of literature and social commentary.

Hammond wrote that she first visited New York tenement houses as a
teenager and volunteered in an urban mission until her worried family
put a stop to it.[^25] This undated event, which would have taken place
in the mid-1870s (during the great depression of that decade), occurred
well ahead of the urban reform efforts that would take firmer shape in
the 1890s as a national progressive movement. To put this into a
chronological context, remember that Jane Addams did not open Hull-House
in Chicago until 1889 and that Jacob Riis did not write his exposé on
the tenements of New York until 1890. The teenaged Lily Hardy thus had a
precocious experience with urban reforms, long before most of her
southern contemporaries.

Very shortly after her truncated forays into the tenements, Lily married
a Methodist minister from Georgia, John Dennis Hammond. Born in 1850 in
Franklin, Georgia, John was the son of an attorney and slaveholder. John
graduated from the University of Georgia in 1870 and from Drew
Theological Seminary in New Jersey in 1875. The first student from
Georgia ever to attend Drew, he received training there that was far
more liberal than he would have obtained at any similar southern
institution at the time.[^26] After graduation, John returned to Georgia
and at the time of their marriage in 1879, he was serving in the Oconee
Street Methodist Church in Athens. The newlyweds soon commenced the
pattern of frequent relocations typical of Southern Methodist
clergy.[^27]

In 1886, the Hammonds were sent to Missouri, where John was initially
assigned to pastor the First Methodist Church of St. Louis, and later
was appointed president of a Methodist college in Fayette. Their
children, Henry, Katherine, and Frances, were born in 1887, 1889, and
1893. Despite the demands that a growing family would have entailed,
Lily launched herself into women's missions work during these same
years. By 1895 Lily was appointed to the "Leaflets and Education"
committee of the regional women's missions organization. Her first
publication, entitled "The Parsonage and Home Mission Reading Course,"
was written on behalf of the committee tasked with creating a reading
course for Southern Methodist women. She recommended two books: *Our
Country*, by Josiah Strong, and *Applied Christianity*, by Washington
Gladden.[^28] These were popular texts by two prominent writers from the
social gospel movement. By these choices, Lily was clearly identifying
herself with the social gospel and was encouraging other Southern
Methodist women in that direction as well.

Lily Hammond's career as a social reformer and social gospel activist
was accelerated when her husband's ministry relocated them to one of the
vibrant centers of Southern Methodism and New South urban development.
In 1898, John was appointed the secretary of the Board of Education of
the Southern Methodist church and the family moved to Nashville,
Tennessee. From this post, the couple launched extensive reform careers,
which would bring each of them into positions of leadership in their
respective circles. From Nashville, Lily worked her way into the center
of southern white liberalism of the early-twentieth century.[^29]

Lily Hammond quickly emerged as a leader in the world of Southern
Methodist women's home missions. The women's home missions movement had
spread rapidly across the region, and by 1908, almost 60,000 Southern
Methodist women had joined.[^30] Lily Hammond was recognized as "among
the first women of the Church to rally to support" the movement. In
1898, the first year of her residence in Nashville, Lily was elected
first vice-president of the new Woman's Board of Home Missions. The
following year, when the Southern Methodist women decided to establish a
Bureau of Social Service, Lily was chosen as its first
superintendent.[^31] Thus, as early as the turn of the century she was
widely known and respected by Southern Methodist women as a leader in
their domestic reform efforts.

Moreover, Nashville was a friendly environment for Hammond's developing
views on racial justice, for she found there several kindred spirits.
She became a close friend and coworker with Kate Trawick, a leader in
the YWCA movement and a leading advocate of extending the Y's benefits
to African-American women.[^32] Another prominent Nashville woman, Sara
Estelle Haskin, also worked to build a black YWCA, holding meetings for
black workers at a local mill. Editor of the Methodist youth journal,
*The Young Christian Worker*, Haskin also was a leader in the Bethlehem
settlement house movement. ("Wesley house" was the name Southern
Methodist women gave to their settlements for whites; "Bethlehem house"
was the name given to their settlements for African Americans.)[^33]
Nashville thus offered Lily an environment more receptive to racial
reforms than most places the Hammonds might have been assigned to live.

So it was from Nashville, surrounded by supporters of interracial work,
that Lily Hammond published *The Master-Word* in February 1905. A
talented writer who would work in a variety of genres in her lifetime,
she chose fiction as the medium for a social gospel message. Other
social gospel activists, especially women, also turned to art and
literature during this period as a vehicle for sharing their ideas about
the effort to hurry the arrival of the Kingdom of God. Social
Christianity became an interdisciplinary movement, and journals like
"The Dial" employed poetry, book reviews, advertisements, and feature
stories, all based on the belief that imaginative works could
dramatically present the message of social Christianity. *The
Master-Word* was one of hundreds of social gospel novels published
between 1870 and 1930.[^34] But it was one of the few that made race
relations its central concern.

Contemporary reviewers offered a decidedly mixed set of assessments of
the book. Because Hammond did not create an overtly didactic piece of
work (as did Frances Harper in Iola Leroy), readers could sometimes find
in *The Master-Word* whatever they wanted to see. Some southern whites
could conclude that Hammond was "a woman in keen sympathy with whites of
her section."[^35] One such reader commented: "The writer is correct in
saying that it is 'in full accord with Southern thought and
hopes.'"[^36] Some southern critics, like an unnamed reviewer in the
Montgomery Advertiser, saw in the story a cautionary tale about the
"Black Peril that threatens always the South." The reviewer drew the
conclusion that the message of the book was that "The negro can be truly
lifted only as the white race lifts him.… They are the child race of the
world. They need leading, teaching, control, and always from
above."[^37] One can envision Hammond squirming uncomfortably at that,
for her own views on race were considerably more complex. She worried
more about a white peril than about a black one.

Other Southern reviewers were more concerned that there was danger in
such a story. At this time a tale like this may be too readily
considered as typical, and an exceedingly rare characters \[sic\] accepted
in certain quarter as common types of southern men. Clearly such is not
Mrs. Hammond's view. The author is to be commended for having her
characters show a sense of responsibility toward the unfortunate
child.[^38]

Some non-southern reviewers assumed that she spoke "with absolute
truthfulness," such as this review from Massachusetts:

> The tale will attract by the novelty of its situations and the
> faithfulness of its reproduction of a life with which few are familiar
> at the North. It is a convincing volume, in its way, because its
> author's heart was in her work, and is written with that fluency which
> seems to belong by right of heritage to the women of the South.[^39]

The most balanced assessment was probably that of the reviewer in the
national journal *The Independent*. "The book will not please white
people North or South; it is too awfully right for a certain element of
the South, too lacking in sentimentality for some people in the
North."[^40]

Immediately after the publication of *The Master-Word*, Hammond was
taken ill. It is not hard to imagine that the stress of publishing her
book—or reading the reviews of it—may have contributed to her ill
health. She was unable to write during the period she was in
recuperation, and did not begin to publish again until 1910, with a
couple of short articles in Southern Methodist journals. Her next
significant publication ("The White Man's Debt to the Negro") did not
occur until 1913. Clearly, whatever ailed her had been serious enough to
interrupt her writing for nearly a decade.[^41]

Even if the stress of the political controversy over her book had
contributed to her illness, Hammond did not shy away from similar work
after her health was restored. In books and articles, she continued her
activism till very near the end of her life. Indeed, as time went on,
her work became even more pointed. Her best-known book, *In Black and
White*, published in 1914, was a very direct critique of the
shortcomings of the white South. It laid the blame for the South's
racial conflicts squarely on the shoulders of the region's whites and
gave them full responsibility for improving race relations. Hammond
accompanied her later literary activism with membership in organizations
such as the Southern Sociological Congress and the NAACP, devoting less
attention to the work of the Methodist women's home missions.

In the years after World War I, her husband's declining health and
retirement from the ministry, along with her own physical frailty,
steadily reduced Lily's activism. New organizations such as the
Committee on Interracial Cooperation and the NAACP had her support, but
she no longer had the ability to offer them much leadership. She and
John had moved to New York in 1919 to be closer to their adult children,
and their deaths (John in 1923 and Lily in 1925) were rendered almost
invisible by their distance from the South. Neither of them received
much recognition or memorial by southern reform organizations, or even
by the Methodist community they had led for so many decades. Unlike some
of her progressive-era peers whose stories have been recovered of late,
Lily Hammond's life and career have received little historical
attention.

## *The Master-Word*: The Plot

*The Master-Word* opens with Margaret Lawton, devoted wife and mother,
sitting by the bedside of her critically injured husband, Philip. The
Lawtons are a comfortable rural elite family in late-nineteenth-century
Tennessee (an exact time period is never identified in the text, but it
is clear that Hammond intended the story to represent her present day).
The Lawtons have two young children, and several African-American
servants complete the household. Thrown from a buggy, struck on the head
and unconscious, Philip's life is hanging in the balance and Margaret is
distraught at the possibility of losing him. She has seen her life as
idyllic and her love for her husband is deep.

While Philip lies in bed, a mulatto woman ("three parts white") enters
the house, and demands of Margaret that Philip pay the money he owes her
before he dies. Margaret learns in horror that the woman had born Philip
a child, a daughter nearly the same age as Margaret's own daughter. He
had promised the woman money to support the child, in exchange for her
silence. Margaret's heart is broken; she considers a divorce but decides
against it, for the sake of her own children. She vows to protect the
family's good name by continuing to keep Philip's secret, but her love
for him is gone. Philip begs for her forgiveness, but she is unable to
overcome the betrayal of her marriage and offers him no comfort. (It is
the adultery that Margaret focuses on, not the race of the woman
involved, which does not seem to be the issue to her.) On his deathbed,
he tells her that her unbending adherence to goodness and truth has
broken him, that he has finally seen she was right all along. He has
found peace, and asks her once more to forgive him. Greatly moved by
Philip's declaration, Margaret concludes that she was wrong to withhold
her forgiveness, but before she can say it, he is gone.

After Philip's death, Margaret decides to try to right his wrong by
providing an education and upbringing for the mulatto child. She brings
the girl Elvira, known as Viry, to live in her house, explaining to all
that the girl is the orphaned relative of her house servant, Aunt
Dilsey. Viry will work for the Lawtons, but will also be raised and
educated by Margaret. She will be sent to school and later to college.
Margaret decides that Viry will one day be a school teacher and will
work to uplift her race. Viry of course knows nothing of these plans,
nor does she know the details of her parentage.

Viry grows up as friend, playmate, and servant to the Lawton children,
Bess and Dick. Another member of their circle is neighbor Bruce, who
plays with them all but has an instinctive dislike of Viry, and finds
her blue eyes disturbing in a "colored" child. Aunt Dilsey, the elderly
mammy figure, is the only other character who knows the truth of Viry's
genealogy. It is also Dilsey's role to teach all the children—black and
white—the ways of race in turn-of-the-century Tennessee. In one scene,
Aunt Dilsey tells little Bess that she is not to carry the heavy chair,
but Viry can because "hit don' hurt niggers ter tote cheers w'at's too
big fer um"(46).\
The children have to learn about the complexity of race in a world where
generations of racial mixing have created a bewildering array of colors
that vividly deny the social constructions of race as "black" and
"white."

> "But Viry—" \[Bess\] put her head on one side and surveyed her companion
> critically —"you isn't a nigger; you's white."
>
> "Aunt Dilsey say I's a nigger," said Viry, finally.
>
> "Well, you isn' " —Bess, bold as she was, caught her breath as she
> found herself on the edge of this heretical contradiction of
> authority. "You look like you's white," she said doubtfully (49).

Aunt Dilsey intervenes in this discussion to explain: "\[D\]is yere chile
is er nigger, en she ain't got ter fergit hit one minnit. Come yere."
Viry came obediently, a puzzled look on her little face as she saw the
troubled earnestness on Aunt Dilsey's. "I knows you ain't black on de
outside like me en Par'lee, Elviry," she said solemnly; "but dat's des
skin-deep. Ef I wuz ter peel off dis yere skin er yo'n, you'd be ez
black ez me underneaf. Don' you en Bess fergit hit; you's black. En
black folks b'longs wid black folks, en ef dey does diffunt, old Satun
gits um, sho'. You en yo' Miss Bess kin be good frien's, same ez Miss
Marg'ret en my Eb'neezer is good frien's; but Eb'neezer, he er nigger,
en he know hit, en Miss Marg'ret know hit, too; she de lady, en he de
servant; en hit's des daterway wid you en Bess. De onlies' place w'at's
w'ite in Viry," she went on impressively, "is her soul. De lawd puts
w'ite souls in eve'ybody" (52).

In Aunt Dilsey's world, as for most southerners of her time, anyone with
any amount of black ancestry is defined as black. The children
eventually absorb these lessons and accept them as fact. Hammond's
message here was subtle, but important: "race" is learned, and by
implication can be unlearned.

While the children are being schooled on race relations, the New South
comes to their county and dramatically changes the context in which
their stories intertwine. Phosphate ore is discovered in the region, and
Margaret reluctantly gives in to the pressure to mine the phosphates
found on her extensive properties. Although the phosphate mines bring
jobs, wealth, and a sense of doing good for others (her son Dick
especially sees the benefits of phosphates as fertilizers to help poor
farmers produce better crops), the new industry also disrupts social
relations. Newcomers, mostly single, black, male workers, move in. Crime
increases. Local politicians buy votes with whiskey, and elections are
completely corrupted. Margaret tries to help improve the troubled
neighborhood first through charity, and later through supporting
progressive reforms such as settlements and kindergartens. By contrast,
the white men of the county attempt to "improve" the neighborhood by
disfranchising black men. Although she never states directly that white
men are the source of racial problems, Hammond puts the most racially
offensive comments in the novel into the mouths of male characters. All
the violence in the novel likewise comes at the hands of white men. The
white women of the story demonstrate varying levels of racial tolerance.

The years pass, and the children go to school and then to college. Viry
struggles to find a place for herself in the world. Raised in a wealthy
white family that accepts her without judgment, she comes to loathe the
poor black children she sees all around her. Although she loves Aunt
Dilsey, Viry feels close to no other black person. She dutifully gets
her teaching credentials as Margaret had planned, but hates being
allowed to teach only black children. She identifies with whites, but
knows that she is rejected by them. The only place for Viry seems to be
in the home of Margaret Lawton.

In the meantime, all the young characters decide on their careers and
commence courtships. Bess has numerous suitors, but adopts a carefree
belle-like approach to them all. The neighbor Bruce has fallen in love
with Bess, but believes he cannot ask her to marry him until he is
financially independent. Viry secretly loves Bruce, but since he is
white, she knows she can never act on her love. That secret love, along
with the other painful emotions packed into her troubled life, festers
in the young woman and eventually drives her to attempt suicide with an
overdose of laudanum.

Margaret discovers the overdose in time and saves Viry's life, but the
suicide attempt has made her understand just how desperately unhappy
Viry is and how hard it is for her to fit in to a world so divided by
race. During an impassioned confrontation, Margaret finally tells Viry
the truth about her father and how she had come to live in the Lawton
home. She implores the troubled young woman to let go of her anger and
pain, and instead find a life of service and love. Viry, impressed by
the sacrifice she now understands Margaret has made for her, is
overwhelmed with love and respect, which gives her the ability to
forgive. She resolves to model herself after Margaret, and live a life
of service and love (the "master-word"). The love-story with its
charming ending belongs to Bess, not to Viry. Bess has feigned
disinterest in Bruce and all other suitors throughout most of the novel.
In the final chapters, however, Hammond has Bess acknowledge her own
long secret love of Bruce. Viry finds no such happiness, but in the
final pages Hammond introduces a character that readers are left to
imagine Viry will one day fall in love with—Johnson Tyree, a dignified,
well-educated, black doctor just arrived in town. Once Viry accepts her
life of service and sacrifice, it would seem natural for her to be drawn
to the doctor and for the two of them to begin lives of service
together.

## *The Master-Word*: The Literary Context

Lily Hammond built upon a long tradition of southern women writers whose
domestic fiction carried political commentary. In the antebellum era,
several important southern women novelists used domestic settings to
emphasize the importance of home, women's traditional gender roles, and
folkways to defend the region's superior civilization. Elizabeth Moss
has described this as waging ideological warfare through domestic
fiction, books written exclusively by women for women. Although domestic
fiction had emerged in New England in the 1820s in response to
regionally specific conditions of the northeast, southern writers took
up the genre, merged it with the plantation fiction popular in the same
years, and made it their own. Southern domestic novelists commanded a
respectable following. Caroline Hentz sold 93,000 copies of her novels
over three years, and Augusta Evans claimed late in her career that her
combined works had sold over 425,000 copies. Like northern domestic
fiction, which criticized fluffy ornamental women, the southern variety
glorified the virtuous, resolute, noble plantation mistress at the
expense of the frivolous belle. It was clear that the future of southern
civilization rested with the former rather than the later.[^42]

Beginning in the 1880s, domestic fiction was pushed aside by the
popularity of "local color" fiction and romance novels. Local color or
"regional fiction" dominated the literary scene, meeting a national
demand for stories of simpler times, rural values, and just plain folk.
The South was probably the region most associated in the public mind
with local color literature, and several southern women were important
figures in this group. One of the most widely read was "Charles Egbert
Craddock," the pen name for Mary Noailles Murfree, who published a
collection of local color stories called *In the Tennessee Mountains* in
1884, popular enough to warrant seventeen editions in two years.[^43]
According to scholar Ann Douglas, the local colorists were the group of
women that received the most literary respect in this era, certainly
more so than the domestic or sentimental fiction. They were also more
conscious of themselves as literary professionals, serious writers of
serious material.[^44]

The local color literature had two different directions. One was toward
realism. The realistic writers attempted to record accurately the
pattern of life they observed, preserving a record of a fading culture.
Joel Chandler Harris's retelling of the folk tales of his region was—at
least in part—an attempt to preserve actual stories in the oral
tradition that were rapidly being lost in a changing society. The other
strain in local color writing was a retrospective sentimentalism, a
wistful look back at a romantic past. Novels and stories such as those
by Thomas Nelson Page glorified life in the antebellum South. Many of
the writers in this tradition also regarded slavery as a benign
institution, a social arrangement that brought out the best in both
races.[^45]

Elements of Hammond's work might be categorized as local color. And it
appears that she (or her publisher) hoped to link her work to that
popular genre.[^46] *The Master-Word*'s main plot, the interracial
relationship and the mulatta offspring, could have taken place anywhere
in the South, but Hammond made it quite specific to the Tennessee
phosphate region. She used the setting to include detailed descriptions
of the phosphate mining process, the environmental destruction it
caused, and the labor conflicts surrounding it. Significant phosphate
deposits had in fact been discovered in Tennessee in the late-1880s and
early-1890s, creating frontier boom conditions and instability in the
region. Hammond had clearly done a lot of research on this, and the
portrait is convincingly realistic. Some reviewers categorized *The
Master-Word* as part of the local color genre. Writing in the *South
Atlantic Quarterly*, "E.M." compared Hammond's work to that of James
Lane Allen, a contemporary from Kentucky who also wrote in the local
color tradition.[^47]

Another sign of the local color influence was Hammond's use of dialect.
From the opening pages, she presents the speech of black characters in
dialect. To most twenty-first-century readers, dialect seems like
shocking racial stereotyping by the author. But to Lily's
contemporaries, the use of dialect was more complicated than that. One
way to help create a sense of authenticity in local color fiction was to
attempt to represent the local dialect, meaning both pronunciations and
regionally specific phrases and expressions. This meant that dialect was
both white and black, southern and non-southern—and it swept the nation.
As Gavin Jones has written, "Late-nineteenth-century America was crazy
about dialect literature." "Black dialect, Appalachian dialect, Pike
County dialect, Maine dialect, New Yorkese dialect—every region was
mined for its vernacular gold…. New and often baffling systems of
orthography were invented to capture spoken sounds, and authors waged
battles over whose dialect was most correct." For four decades,
"highbrow" literary magazines such as *The Century* and *Harper's *were
filled with dialect sketches. Dialect was so popular because it
satisfied a vast range of motivations, North and South. Bret Harte's
southwestern dialect stories, James Whitecomb Riley's "Hoosier" poems,
and John Hay's *Pike County Ballads* were all examples of dialect used
for the purpose of regional authenticity. And of course, since *The
Adventures of Huckleberry Finn* is entirely narrated by Huck, it was
entirely narrated in dialect.[^48]

*The Master-Word*, then, can be seen as part of the local color genre,
with its attendant use of dialect as a tool for realistic depiction of
southern life. However, as a novel with a message advocating change, the
book fits this category imperfectly. On the one hand, Hammond does evoke
nostalgia for a rural Tennessee rapidly being destroyed by phosphate
mining. The land is being permanently altered; the fields that had been
the pride of generations are disappearing. On the other hand, Hammond
was advocating the destruction of the racial system traditionally
associated with that rural economy. Unlike Joel Chandler Harris, she was
not attempting to preserve a record of a culture before it was lost.
Instead, she was trying to change that culture.

Other local color writers, such as Sherwood Bonner, centered their
stories on romances of reunion. Typically a southern belle and a
northern officer meet during the Civil War or Reconstruction, fall in
love, and after overcoming the opposition of their families, they marry
and thus help to bind the country back together. "Reconstruction
romances" or "border romances" were part of a larger national effort to
write away the sectionalism of the past, and come to understand the
nature of the recently reunited nation and its future course. Nina
Silber and other scholars have explored the gendered nature of this
national discussion, with the South represented by a delicate woman
while a virile, energetic man symbolized the victorious North.[^49] Lily
Hammond, by contrast, wrote a local color romance that had nothing to do
with reunion or sectional reconciliation. Her characters are southerners
with numerous northern connections (they travel, they have friends in
the north), but none of the several romances in the book had any
sectional component to them. In fact, the Civil War and Reconstruction
were absent entirely in *The Master-Word*. We see no local Confederate
heroes, we hear no tales of buried family silver or faithful family
slaves. The novel is solidly located in the New South, but one which
seems surprisingly disconnected from the Old South. In one sense, by
critiquing the New South, especially the disruption of social relations
being produced by industrialism, Hammond was condemning the results of
sectional reconciliation. The New South economy, modeled on the
industrial and urban northeast, was creating a host of new problems that
were only just beginning to be discussed in 1905. Although certainly not
attempting to serve as an exposé like those by Ida Tarbell or Upton
Sinclair, Hammond's novel nevertheless tried to do what the muckrakers
were doing: bring a social problem to light in hopes that the scrutiny
would produce a solution.

*The Master-Word* may also be seen as part of the southern literary
renaissance. Although for many years scholars accepted without question
Allen Tate's definition of the renaissance (a backward glance as the
South re-entered the larger world after World War I), more recently both
his periodization and his definition of the movement have been
vigorously contested. Carol Manning's well-known critique of the history
of the southern renaissance pushed us to see the literary awakening as
inspired by turn-of-the-century social tensions rather than the Great
War's great disillusionments. Some southerners, she wrote, especially
southern white women, began to write fiction that dissected the region's
culture much earlier than the Nashville Agrarians. Frequently described
as artists ahead of their time, Ellen Glasgow and Kate Chopin are the
best known examples of southern women writers re-interpreted as standing
at the beginnings of the southern renaissance.[^50]

Most recently, some scholars have virtually abandoned the term
"renaissance" for this era. Bertram Wyatt-Brown substituted the phrases
the "southern efflorescence" and the "regional literary efflorescence,"
and preferred to think of the writers as part of a larger "modernism."
"In the late-nineteenth-century American South," he wrote, "women
writers—not their male colleagues—were the first 'moderns' of southern
literature. More accurately we might label them transitional
romanticists or transitional modernists, for they stood halfway between
the old literary ways and the new."[^51] Similarly Thomas L. McHaney
argued for an enlarged context: "But Modernism was in southern soil
early enough; and the literary movement usually called the Southern
Renascence was, in reality, a southern branch office of the Midwestern
division of the North American franchise of that international movement
in the arts that flourished in Paris, London, Milan, Munich, and other
capitals during the second and third decades of the twentieth
century."[^52] In this sense then, *The Master-Word* was part of the
early-twentieth-century effort to critique southern culture and politics
from the inside. Long before H.L. Mencken condemned the South for its
cultural stasis, writers and reformers like Hammond were holding up bits
of southern culture to the light and examining them without flinching.

*The Master-Word* is also part of the turn-of-the-century wave of social
gospel novels.[^53] At first glance, present-day readers might not see
this book as reflecting any religious position. Hammond never uses the
phrase "the social gospel," nor does she talk about Jesus, salvation, or
Christianity. But *The Master-Word* follows the plot line of the typical
social gospel novel, as described by scholar Janet Olson: a protagonist
has his or her insulated, middle-class, peace of mind shattered by an
encounter with the poverty and despair of a working class character. The
shaken hero or heroine investigates the circumstances, acknowledges the
consequences of unethical industrial capitalism, and finally accepts
personal moral responsibility as a Christian and a citizen. In the
process of helping others, the middle-class characters rediscover the
simple Christian message of love and brotherhood.[^54] Hammond's unique
contribution to this literature was to substitute race for class, and to
make the setting the New South.

The social gospel message of *The Master-Word* is not as overt as in the
novels of Charles M. Sheldon (the most famous and most prolific of the
genre), which asked pointedly "what would Jesus do?" Instead, Hammond
implies the question should be "what can one woman do?"[^55] As an
answer, the book gently models a social gospel life. Scholar Susan
Lindley has observed that social gospel novels urged "readers toward a
particular set of values and course of actions, hoping to touch their
emotions more than their intellect."[^56] This encouragement need not be
as direct as a sermon. As Erin Smith has noted, social gospel novels
were supposed to move readers to "social action. That is, one reads not
in order to contemplate abstract ideas or to improve oneself, but in
order to change the world."[^57] In the case of *The Master-Word*,
Margaret Lawton modeled a social gospel response to a series of
challenges, providing an example for other women of how to raise their
children, how best to live as part of a community, and how to steer a
new course through race relations in the twentieth-century South.
Readers could not help but be inspired by the character, since Hammond
made sure that her flaws were few and that all the other characters
adored her.

Margaret possesses all the female virtues cherished by her class. She
never has a concern for herself; her energies are directed outward, to
helping everyone around her. Devoted to her children, they in turn adore
her. Margaret's inner strength sees her through the crisis of her
husband's injury and death. After Philip's death, Margaret proves to be
an astute manager of the estate and indeed ultimately turns more profit
than he had done, despite her insistence that the workers' cabins must
be improved and their health maintained. The family's fortunes are
greatly increased under her management.[^58] Margaret treats her
servants like family, and they too are loyal to the end. Ebenezer, the
black farm manager, describes her as "a cross between a humming-bird and
an angel."

All of those qualities would have been familiar goals for antebellum
southern ladies, but Margaret possesses additional qualities that
postbellum southern matrons required. Where an antebellum southern lady
had a quiet nobility (think of Melanie Wilkes in *Gone with the Wind*),
Margaret Lawton emerges as a strong southern matron in the wake of
Philip's accident and betrayal, capable of dealing firmly even with her
husband. Just before his death, Philip realizes with a shock that
Margaret had not really been the obedient and submissive wife he had
always thought she was; rather he had been the head of the family only
because she had permitted it. "He was first angered, and then
frightened, by the growing perception that he had ruled because it had
been her will that he should rule, and that against her final decision
he must dash himself in vain" (22).

Margaret's strength of character, grounded in a deep morality, is
recognized by everyone—of every class and every race. In one of the most
dramatic scenes in the novel, a drunken mob of black laborers led by a
white man with a grudge against the Lawtons approached Margaret's house
while the men of the family were away. Hoping to terrify the Lawton
women to bring them down a notch by their vulnerability, the white
ringleader instead found a calm, self-assured Margaret standing in the
doorway of her house, armed with a cocked pistol. She dispersed the
crowd without a word, as they responded to her "fearlessness, the sense
of dominance, of security of power, of a race long used to mastery."
Besides, "\[t\]here was scarcely one of them who had not heard some story
of her kindness to members of their race, and several had had personal
experience of it. All of them knew that she had been 'read out' in both
the colored churches of the village as a friend of the negroes. They
stared in admiration at her beauty, and took a genuine pleasure in her
pride; she was real 'quality, fo' sho''"(248).

Most importantly, Hammond's model for social gospel womanhood sees all
people through a lens of love. Where most other southern white women of
her generation would have shunned the mixed-race child, Margaret instead
sees the girl as a victim to be helped. She hopes to right the great
wrong done to Viry by providing her with the education that would help
lift her above what might otherwise be a grim future. Although Margaret
cannot make other whites accept Viry and she never considers publicly
acknowledging Viry as Philip's child, Margaret can offer her a good home
and a surrogate loving family. Viry's attempted suicide finally makes it
clear to Margaret that the refuge she has offered Viry is insufficient.
The young woman cannot escape the larger world; instead she must be
properly armed to handle it. Margaret has to tell her the truth about
her parentage and about the efforts Margaret has made on her behalf, and
hopes that this truth will instill in the troubled young woman a sense
of the possibilities of self-sacrifice. Viry comes to understand that
this kind of love is *The Master-Word*. Hammond's message could not be
clearer: southern whites must look past their racial prejudice to see
what those around them truly need from them. By helping Viry to find her
own life of service to others, Margaret has accomplished much to improve
her larger society.

This was a quietly subversive message in 1905, when segregation was
hardening from custom into law and racial violence had reached horrific
new levels. Hammond was using her novel to push the social gospel into
the fray of race relations. Where most progressive reformers attempted
to ignore racial problems altogether, Hammond gently but firmly insisted
that racial hostilities were not immutable, as most southern whites
contended. Neither here nor in her future writings did Lily ever go so
far as to declare that whites and blacks should one day reach such a
level of equality that intermarriage would be natural and acceptable.
*The Master-Word* does not imply an endorsement of interracial sex, but
it does demand sympathy and acceptance for the innocent offspring of
such unions. To accept the mulatta and make her existence cease to be
tragic would require some blurring of the rigid line that supposedly
separated the races.

Hammond's social gospel message was subtle, although her contemporaries
probably picked up on the language cues more readily than would many
readers today. "Love is the Law above the law, *The Master-Word* of
all," she wrote (31). This was an important social gospel theme—the law
of love—and readers in 1905 were more likely to intuit that cue than
would readers in the twenty-first century. Washington Gladden, one of
the important early theologians of the social gospel, began using the
phrase "the law of love" in the 1880s.[^59] A contemporary journal
called *Social Gospel* described the movement as "the application of
Christ's Golden Rule and Law of Love to all the business and affairs of
life."[^60] The advocates of the social gospel had no monopoly on the
use of the phrase, but Hammond's contemporaries would have understood
the two to be linked.

Along with other recently rediscovered or republished works by southern
women writers, *The Master-Word* is part of a neglected literary history
that is only beginning to work its way into the canon. This essay argues
that the book should now take its place as a southern social gospel
novel. And for southern religious history, *The Master-Word* adds new
evidence for reconsidering the presence of the social gospel movement on
the region. I am not claiming that the recovery of this one out-of-print
book proves that the South was a bastion of the social gospel. Instead
it is my hope that it may encourage scholars to seek out other
overlooked literature from the era, to see where it all might lead us in
understanding the place of the social gospel in southern religious
history. We have not looked systematically for this generation of "lost"
fiction, but *The Master-Word* suggests that analysis of additional
works may help us uncover a richer history of literary activism than we
have known to date, peopled by men and women currently absent from our
vision.

[^1]: Display ad, *The New York Times*, February 18, 1905, BR16. All
    citations to the New York Times are to the online edition.
    Publication information on the novel: L.H. Hammond, *The
    Master-Word, A Story of the South Today* (New York: The Macmillan
    Co., 1905). Throughout this essay, direct quotes from the novel are
    cited parenthetically in text.

[^2]: Display ad, *The New York Times*, March 4, 1905, BR134.

[^3]: Some reviewers clearly knew who "L.H. Hammond" was, identifying
    her with information not included in the novel or the
    advertisements. The reviewer in the South Atlantic Quarterly knew
    she was married to the Secretary of the Board of Education of the
    Southern Methodist Church. "Book Reviews and Notes," *South Atlantic
    Quarterly* 4 (July 1905), 298. The reviewer in the *Montgomery
    Advertiser* identified her as "Mrs. John D. Hammond," even though
    that was not how she was identified by the publisher of the novel
    (February 19, 1905), 21. Others had no knowledge of her, and assumed
    that "L.H." Hammond was a man. See, for example, "Novels of the
    South," *The American Monthly Review of Reviews* 31 (June 1905),
    760. Such a reader must have missed the fact that Hammond dedicated
    the book to her husband.

[^4]: "Literature," *Independent* 58 (April 20, 1905), 902.

[^5]: "Recent Fiction," *Christian Advocate* 80 (April 20, 1905), 628.

[^6]: Her prior published fiction included "A Successful Marriage,"
    *Harper's* 105 (October 1902): 747–52; and "Footstep of Fear,"
    *Independent* 55 (August 27, 1903): 2031–34. Her published poetry
    included "Knights Errant," *Century* 56 (August 1898): 583; "A
    November Evening," *Outlook* 75 (November 14, 1903): 655; and for
    children a poem entitled "Typewriter Family," *St. Nicholas* 32
    (March 1905): 417. After publication of *The Master-Word*, Hammond
    focused almost exclusively on non-fiction the rest of her career.
    The main exception was a novel entitled *In the Garden of Delight*
    (New York: Thomas Y. Crowell Co., 1916).

[^7]: "A Story of the South," *The New York Times* (March 4, 1905),
    BR130.

[^8]: Some recent work on the history of progressivisms includes:
    Charles R. McCann, Jr., *Order and Control in American
    Socio-economic Thought: Social Scientists and Progressive-Era
    Reform* (New York: Routledge, 2012); Lisa Szefel, *The Gospel of
    Beauty in the Progressive Era: Reforming American Verse and Values*
    (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2011); and Jeanne D. Petit, *The Men
    and Women We Want: Gender, Race, and the Progressive Era Literacy
    Test Debate* (Rochester, N.Y.: University of Rochester Press, 2010).

[^9]: The social gospel movement has experienced a recent scholarly
    "revival." See especially Michael Bourgeois, *All Things Human:
    Henry Codman Potter and the Social Gospel in the Episcopal Church*
    (Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 2004); Susan Curtis, *A
    Consuming Faith: The Social Gospel and Modern American Culture*
    (Columbia: University of Missouri Press, 2001); Gary Scott Smith,
    *The Search for Social Salvation: Social Christianity and America,
    1880–1925* (Lanham, Md.: Lexington Books, 2000); Christopher H.
    Evans, "Ties That Bind: Walter Rauschenbusch, Reinhold Niebuhr, and
    the Quest for Economic Justice," *Soundings: An Interdisciplinary
    Journal* 95:4 (2012): 351–369; Bill Pitts, "Popular Reception of
    Rauschenbusch's Christianity and the Social Crisis, 1907–1909,"
    *American Baptist Quarterly* 28.2 (2009): 162–179; Janet R. Nelson,
    "Walter Rauschenbusch and the Social Gospel: A Hopeful Theology for
    the Twenty-First Century Economy," *Cross Currents* 59.4 (2009):
    442–456; and Matthew Bowman, "Sin, Spirituality, and Primitivism:
    The Theologies of the American Social Gospel, 1885–1917," *Religion
    & American Culture* 17.1 (2007): 95–126.

[^10]: This localism is also reflected in a recent trend in the
    scholarship, which focuses on local and regional examples of the
    social gospel. See for example Jeremy Bonner, "The Limits of
    Acceptable Behavior: The 'Arundel Affair' and the Social Gospel in
    Progressive Pittsburgh," *Western Pennsylvania History* 92.2 (2009):
    50–61; Paul Boyer, "An Ohio Leader of the Social Gospel Movement,"
    Ohio History 116.1 (2009): 88–100; John Storey, "A Better World
    Through Practical Christianity: The Career of D. R. Pevoto," *Texas
    Gulf Historical & Biographical Record* 45.1 (2009): 15–30; and Alan
    F. Bearman and Jennifer L. Mills, "Charles M. Sheldon and Charles F.
    Parham," *Kansas History* 32.2 (2009):106–123.

[^11]: A "network of movements" comes from Ronald C. White, Jr. and C.
    Howard Hopkins, *The Social Gospel: Religion and Reform in Changing
    America* (Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1976). For an
    emphasis on radicalism and socialism, see Dan McKanan, "The Implicit
    Religion of Radicalism: Socialist Party Theology, 1900–1934,"
    *Journal of the American Academy of Religion* 78.3 (2010): 750-789;
    and Doug Rossinow, "The Radicalization of the Social Gospel: Harry
    F. Ward and the Search for a New Social Order," *Religion & American
    Culture* 15.1 (2005): 63–106 . On the connections to academic
    sociology, see Joyce E. Williams and Vicky M. Maclean, "In Search of
    the Kingdom: The Social Gospel, Settlement Sociology, and the
    Science of Reform in America's Progressive Era," *Journal of the
    History of the Behavioral Sciences* 48.4 (2012): 339–362.

[^12]: John Lee Eighmy, "Religious Liberalism in the South during the
    Progressive Era," Church History 38.3 (1969): 367, 370. On the
    social gospel in the South, see especially Wayne Flynt, "Not An
    Island Unto Itself: Southern Baptists and the New Theological Trends
    (Liberalism, Ecumenism, and the Social Gospel), 1890-1940,"
    *American Baptist Quarterly* 22.2 (2003): 158–179; Betsy Flowers,
    "Southern Baptist Evangelicals or Social Gospel Liberals? The
    Woman's Missionary Union and Social Reform, 1888 to 1928," *American
    Baptist Quarterly* 19.2 (2000): 106–128; Carol Crawford Holcomb,
    "The Kingdom at Hand: The Social Gospel and the Personal Service
    Department of Woman's Missionary Union, Auxiliary to the Southern
    Baptist Convention," Baptist History & Heritage 35.2 (2000): 49–66;
    Paul Harvey, "Southern Baptists and the Social Gospel: White
    Religious Progressivism in the South, 1900–1925," *Fides et
    Historia* 27.2 (1995): 59–77; and Ellen Jeffery Blue, "The Gospel
    According to St. Mark's: Methodist Women Embodying a Liberating
    Theology from the Social Gospel to the Civil Rights Era at a
    Deaconess-run Settlement House in the French Quarter of New Orleans"
    (PhD diss., Tulane University, 2002).

[^13]: Wendy J. Deichman Edwards and Carolyn De Swarte Gifford, eds.
    *Gender and the Social Gospel* (Urbana and Chicago: University of
    Illinois Press, 2003), 4–5; and Mary Agnes Dougherty, "The Social
    Gospel According to Phoebe," in *Women in New Worlds*, eds. Hilah F.
    Thomas and Rosemary Skinner Keller (Nashville: Abingdon Press,
    1981), 200–201.

[^14]: This growing literature includes: Patricia J. Sehulster, "Frances
    Harper's Religion of Responsibility in Sowing and Reaping," *Journal
    of Black Studies* 40.6 (2010): 1136–1152; Cornelius L. Bynum, "'An
    Equal Chance in the Race for Life': Reverdy C. Ransom, Socialism,
    and the Social Gospel Movement, 1890–1920," *Journal of African
    American History* 93.1 (2008): 1–20; Terell Dale Goddard, "The Black
    Social Gospel in Chicago, 1896–1906: The Ministries of Reverdy C.
    Ranson and Richard R. Wright, Jr.," *Journal of Negro History* 84.3
    (1999): 227–246; Ingrid Overacker, "True to Our God: African
    American Women as Christian Activists in Rochester, New York,"
    *Gender and the Social Gospel*, eds. Edwards and Gifford, 202–216;
    and Clayborne Carson, "Martin Luther King, Jr., and the
    African-American Social Gospel," in *African-American Christianity:
    Essays in History*, ed. Paul E. Johnson (Berkeley: University of
    California Press, 1994).

[^15]: Evelyn Brooks Higginbotham, *Righteous Discontent: The Women's
    Movement in the Black Baptist Church, 1880–1920* (Cambridge: Harvard
    University Press, 1993), 174-75; Paul Harvey, *Freedom's Coming:
    Religious Culture and the Shaping of the South from the Civil War
    through the Civil Rights Era* (Chapel Hill: University of North
    Carolina Press, 2005), 72; Gary Scott Smith, *The Search for Social
    Salvation: Social Christianity and America, 1880–1925* (Lanham, Md.:
    Lexington Books, 2000), 41, 224-27; and Jacquelyn Rouse, *Lugenia
    Burns Hope: Black Southern Reformer* (Athens: University of Georgia
    Press, 1985).

[^16]: Benjamin J. Wetzel, "Onward Christian Soldiers: Lyman Abbott's
    Justification of the Spanish-American War," *Journal of Church and
    State* 54:3 (2011): 406–425.

[^17]: Cecil E. Greek, *The Religious Roots of American Sociology* (New
    York: Garland, 1992), 47–50. Greek calls Strong's *Our Country* "one
    of the most nativistic tracts ever written" (90).

[^18]: Stephen W. Angell and Anthony B. Pinn, eds., *Social Protest
    Thought in the African Methodist Episcopal Church*, 1862-1939
    (Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press, 2000), 310.

[^19]: Harvey, Freedom's Coming, 65–66. Paul Boyer noted that Washington
    Gladden's early support for anti-lynching legislation did not lead
    to a larger anti-racist agenda for the social gospel theologian.
    After 1895, Gladden largely ignored racial violence and segregation
    as subjects, even when writing on "The Negro Problem." Boyer, "An
    Ohio Leader of the Social Gospel Movement," 97–98.

[^20]: Peter H. Hobbie, "Walter L. Lingle, Presbyterians, and the Enigma
    of the Social Gospel in the South," *American Presbyterians* 69.3
    (1991):198.

[^21]: A substantial literature on Southern progressivism can be
    represented here by two foundational and synthetic works: Dewey W.
    Grantham, *Southern Progressivism: The Reconciliation of Progress
    and Tradition* (Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press, 1983); and
    William A. Link, *The Paradox of Southern Progressivism, 1880–1930*
    (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1992).

[^22]: A sample of representative works: Lee L. Willis, *Southern
    Prohibition: Race, Reform, and Public Life in Middle Florida,
    1821–1920* (Athens: University of Georgia Press, 2011); Shelley
    Sallee, *The Whiteness of Child Labor Reform in the New South*
    (Athens: University of Georgia Press, 2004); and Georgina Hickey,
    *Hope and Danger in the New South City: Working-Class Women and
    Urban Development in Atlanta, 1890–1940* (Athens: University of
    Georgia Press, 2003).

[^23]: In addition to literature cited elsewhere herein, see also
    Raymond R. Sommerville, *An Ex-Colored Church: Social Activism in
    the CME Church, 1870–1970* (Macon, Ga.: Mercer University Press,
    2004); Andrew Billingsley, *Mighty Like a River: The Black Church
    and Social Reform* (New York: Oxford University Press, 1999); and
    Peter J. Parish, *The Social Teaching of the Black Churches*
    (Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1985).

[^24]: Henry Warner Bowden, ed. *Dictionary of American Religious
    Biography*, 2nd edition (Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press, 1993),
    223–24. This brief sketch is one of the few published sources of
    biographical information available for Lily Hammond. The description
    of Packer Institute comes from its current website, The Packer
    Collegiate Institute, accessed November 27, 2012,
    http://www.packer.edu/page.cfm?p=1751 .

[^25]: Lily Hardy Hammond, *In Black and White: An Interpretation of the
    South*, ed. Elna C. Green (Athens: University of Georgia Press,
    2008), x.

[^26]: Drew prided itself on its record of social Christianity, claiming
    to be the first theological seminary in the country to establish a
    Chair of Christian Sociology. Ezra Squire Tipple, ed., *Drew
    Theological Seminary, 1867–1917* (New York: Methodist Book Concern,
    1917), 168.

[^27]: John Hammond has received little scholarly attention. Information
    on his education and career comes from the *Year Book and Minutes of
    the Fifty-Eighth Session of the North Georgia Conference, M.E.
    Church, South, Wesley Memorial Church, November 19–24, 1924*, ed.
    H.C. Emory, 87–88; Harold Lawrence, ed., *Methodist Preachers in
    Georgia*, 1783–1900 (Tignall, Ga.: Boyd Publishing, 1984), 224; and
    his obituary in the *New York Times* (December 12, 1923).

[^28]: "The Parsonage and Home Mission Reading Course," *Our Homes* 3
    (September 1894): 1–2.

[^29]: John Hammond's job required him to attend annual meetings of all
    the different Southern Methodist conferences. In 1901, for example,
    he reported attending nineteen of the annual conferences. *Seventh
    Annual Report of the Board of Education of the Methodist Episcopal
    Church, South* (Nashville: MECS, 1901), 10. Lily travelled nearly
    as much. Between the two of them, they had contact with an extensive
    network of social reformers across the region.

[^30]: Mary E. Frederickson, "Shaping a New Society: Methodist Women and
    Industrial Reform in the South, 1880–1940," in *Women in New Worlds:
    Historical Perspectives on the Wesleyan Tradition*, eds. Hilah E.
    Thomas and Rosemary Skinner Keller (Nashville: Abingdon Press,
    1981), Vol. 1, 353.

[^31]: Mrs. R.W. MacDonell, *Belle Harris Bennett: Her Life Work* (New
    York: Garland Publishing, 1928, reprint, 1987), 85; Sara Estelle
    Haskin, *Women and Missions in the Methodist Episcopal Church,
    South* (Nashville: M.E.C.,S, 1920), 32; Anne Firor Scott, *The
    Southern Lady: From Pedestal to Politics, 1830–1930*
    (Charlottesville: University Press of Virginia, 1995, 1970), 195.

[^32]: Carole Stanford Bucy, *Women Helping Women: The YWCA of
    Nashville, 1898-1998* (Nashville: The YWCA of Nashville and Middle
    Tennessee, 1998), 42–43.

[^33]: Ibid., 44.

[^34]: John C. Waldmeir, *Poetry, Prose and Art in the American Social
    Gospel Movement, 1880–1910* (Lewiston, N.Y.: Edwin Mellen Press,
    2002), 23. An extensive listing of social gospel novels can be found
    in the appendix in Robert Glenn Wright, *The Social Christian Novel*
    (New York: Greenwood Press, 1989).

[^35]: "New Book News," *Montgomery Advertiser* (February 19, 1905), 21.
    This review seems to have been cribbed a month later in the
    Washington *Morning Olympian* (March 19, 1905). "The author is a
    Southern woman, keenly in sympathy with the whites of her section"
    (3).

[^36]: "Book Reviews and Notes," *South Atlantic Quarterly* 4 (July
    1905), 300.

[^37]: "New Book News," *Montgomery Advertiser* (March 5, 1905), 21.

[^38]: "With Writers and Books," (Columbia, S.C.) *The State* (April 9,
    1905), 15.

[^39]: "Literature," *Massachusetts Ploughman and New England Journal of
    Agriculture* 64 (September 23, 1905), 2

[^40]: "Literature," *Independent* 58 (April 20, 1905), 903.

[^41]: The exact nature of Hammond's condition was never disclosed
    publicly, but since she spent considerable time in New York's
    Steuben Sanatorium it is possible that she was suffering from
    tuberculosis. (Her letter in the *Twentieth Annual Report of the
    Woman's Home Society of the Methodist Episcopal Church South*
    \[Nashville: MECS, 1906\] was posted from Steuben Sanitarium.)

[^42]: Elizabeth Moss, *Domestic Novelists in the Old South: Defenders
    of Southern Culture* (Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press,
    1992), 2–3, 20.

[^43]: Amy Thompson McCandless, "The Postbellum Novel," in *The History
    of Southern Women's Literature*, eds. Carolyn Perry and Mary Louise
    Weaks, eds (Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 2002),
    142–43; and Gavin Jones, *Strange Talk: The Politics of Dialect
    Literature in Gilded Age America* (Berkeley: University of
    California, 1999), 7.

[^44]: Ann Douglas Wood, "The Literature of Impoverishment: The Women
    Local Colorists in America, 1865–1914," *Women's Studies* 1.1
    (1972): 12.

[^45]: Sylvia Wallace Holton, *Down Home and Uptown: The Representation
    of Black Speech in American Fiction* (Rutherford: Fairleigh
    Dickinson University Press, 1984), 74. At least one book has
    suggested that white women regionalists were "significantly less
    nostalgic" than were male writers. Although they might look back
    wistfully at antebellum race or class relations, it was harder for
    them to ignore the "conflict between marriage and self-realization."
    See Elizabeth Ammons and Valerie Rohy, *American Local Color
    Writing, 1880–1920* (New York: Penguin Books, 1998), xxii.

[^46]: Since no personal papers are extant, we cannot know whether the
    editors at Macmillan pushed Hammond to write local color. But
    certainly other authors of her generation were pressured to do so.
    Grace King's editor at Macmillan, George P. Brett, encouraged her to
    use plantation settings and "Reconstruction romances" as themes. See
    Michael Kreyling, "After the War: Romance and the Reconstruction of
    Southern Literature," in *Southern Literature in Transition:
    Heritage and Promise*, eds. Philip Castille and William Osborne
    (Memphis: Memphis State University Press, 1983), 117–1

[^47]: "Book Reviews and Notes," *The South Atlantic Quarterly* 4 (July
    1905): 299.

[^48]: Holton, *Down Home and Uptown*, 87. It is worth mentioning that
    the use of dialect continues to be seen as a means of depicting
    culture authentically. See Kathryn Stockett, *The Help *(New York:
    Amy Einhorn Books/Putnam, 2009). The late-nineteenth-century dialect
    movement in literature was accompanied by a newfound academic
    interest in folklore and dialect, symbolized by the formation of the
    American Folklore Society in 1888 and the American Dialect Society
    the following year. Jones, *Strange Talk*, 17. The 1890s saw a
    sudden surge of scholarly attention, both in established venues such
    as the *North American Review* and new outlets such as *Dialect
    Notes*. Just as examples: Armstrong Wauchope, "The Value of
    Dialect," *North American Review* 158 (1894); "Use and Abuse of
    Dialect," The Dial 18 (1895); and E.S. Sheldon, "What is a
    Dialect?," *Dialect Notes* 1 (1896). In other words, Hammond's use
    of dialect put her squarely in the mainstream of American literature
    at the turn-of-the-century. And, as Jane Turner Censer has observed,
    the use of dialect did not necessarily conform to social and
    political conservatism. Authors Amélie Rives and Sherwood Bonner
    both were practitioners of dialect, while holding socially "daring"
    views. By contrast, the more politically conservative Frances Fisher
    tended to avoid its use. Jane Turner Censer, *The Reconstruction of
    White Southern Womanhood, 1865–1895* (Baton Rouge: Louisiana State
    University Press, 2003), 270.

[^49]: Nina Silber, *The Romance of Reunion: Northerners and the South,
    1865–1900* (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1993).

[^50]: Carol S. Manning, "The Real Beginning of the Southern
    Renaissance," in Carol S. Manning, ed., *The Female Tradition in
    Southern Literature* (Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1993),
    38.

[^51]: Bertram Wyatt-Brown, *Hearts of Darkness: Wellsprings of a
    Southern Literary Tradition* (Baton Rouge: Louisiana State
    University Press, 2003), 184, 181.

[^52]: Thomas L. McHaney, "Literary Modernism: The South Goes Modern and
    Keeps on Going," in *Southern Literature in Transition: Heritage and
    Promise*, eds. Philip Castille and William Osborne (Memphis: Memphis
    State University Press, 1983), 43.

[^53]: On social gospel novels more generally, see Elmer Suderman,
    "Utopia, the Kingdom of God and Heaven: Utopian, Social Gospel, and
    Gates Ajar Fiction," *American Studies* 31.1 (1990): 91–101; Dana F.
    White, "A Summons for the Kingdom of God on Earth: The Early
    Social-Gospel Novel," *South Atlantic Quarterly* 67.3 (1968):
    469–485; and Elmer F. Suderman, "The Social-Gospel Novelists'
    Criticism of American Society," *Midcontinent American Studies
    Journal* 7 (1966): 45-60

[^54]: Janet C. Olson, "*In His Steps*: A Social Gospel Novel," in
    *Religions of the United States in Practice*, ed. Colleen McDannell
    (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2001), Vol. 1, 256.

[^55]: Charles M. Sheldon, *In His Steps:"What Would Jesus Do?"*
    (Chicago: Advance Publishing, 1898).

[^56]: Susan H. Lindley, "Women and the Social Gospel Novel," *Church
    History* 54.1 (1985), 57.

[^57]: Erin A. Smith, "'What Would Jesus Do?': The Social Gospel and the
    Literary Marketplace," *Book History* 10 (2007), 194.

[^58]: Anne Firor Scott noted that, even in the antebellum period, "The
    skill with which many widows carried on plantations suggests that
    women knew a good deal more about the planting operation than has
    generally been supposed." *The Southern Lady*, 34. Later in the
    century, novelist Molly Elliott Seawell observed that, amongst the
    Virginia gentry, "the only people in the county who paid their taxes
    promptly were the widows." From *Throckmorton* (New York, 1890),
    quoted by Censer, *Reconstruction of White Southern Womanhood*, 129.

[^59]: Jacob Dorn, *Washington Gladden: Prophet of the Social Gospel*
    (Columbus: Ohio State University Press 1967), 213.

[^60]: Quoted by Richard C. Goode, "The Godly Insurrection in Limestone
    County: Social Gospel, Populism, and Southern Culture in the Late
    Nineteenth Century," *Religion and American Culture* 3.2 (1993),
    156. See also White and Hopkins, *The Social Gospel*, 262.
