---
layout: article
title: "Review: The New Mind of the South"
author-first: Paul
author-last: Harvey
author: Paul Harvey
author-note: "Paul Harvey is a professor of History at the University of 
Colorado-Colorado Springs."
vol: 15
year: 2013
book-reviewed: "Tracy Thompson. <em>The New Mind of the South</em>. New York: Simon and Schuster, 2013. 272 pp. ISBN 978-1-43915-803-6."
---

Here's a perfect non-fiction summer reading for those of you wanting to
settle on your porch in the evening hours, beverage (adult or otherwise)
in hand, and just be entertained and instructed by an author whose
reflections on and travelogue about the contemporary South is one of the
better ones I've ever read. As a native, Thompson isn't taken in by hype
about the South, as was the great writer V. S. Naipaul in his bad book
*A Turn in the South*, where residents who were obviously play-acting
the part of "Southerner" with him fooled the author into some
embarrassing generalizations. Further, unlike most books on the
subjects, Thompson discusses black people as southerners (the term
"southerner," infuriatingly, is nearly always a synonym for "white
southerner," a convention I've spent my scholarly career, without much
effect, trying to overturn). She doesn't do this as much as I would have
liked, but she does it more than most, and I'm happy for that. Further,
she zeroes in immediately on two central issues of "southern
identity"---the legacies of slavery and evangelicalism---and uses those
to frame her book, even while devoting fun-to-read sections on how
contemporary migrants and immigrants (especially Latinos, for whom "the
South" is El Norte) conceive of this region of the United States.

Before discussing this book a bit, let me urge you to listen to Art
Remillard's [podcast][] with the author, yet another of Art's expertly
done conversations with a variety of authors and scholars. The
conversation captures much about the book, and you can hear how the
literal voice of the author matches the metaphorical voice of the author
in reading the book---the author sounds in person like she sounds on the
page: warm, open, engaging, and someone who can engage Latino students
in an Asheboro public school as easily as she can members of a United
Daughters of the Confederacy meeting or Atlantans frustrated at the
perpetual traffic gridlock that grips highways of the region.

And while you're at it, go to the author's blogsite, the *[Blockhead
Chronicles][]*, where she carries on the informal but informative sorts
of discussions that are found in this book. Just recently, I was reading
Walter Johnson's profound new book *River of Dark Dreams: Slavery and
Empire in the Cotton Kingdom* (2013), which implicitly (and at one point
explicitly) draws some parallels between the world the slaveholders
wanted to make, and sometimes made, and the kinds of economic,
environmental, and educational inequalities and degradation of the
contemporary world. Thompson's blog has a [short post][] which
essentially summarizes that point.

The book's title, obviously, plays off Wilbur J. Cash's classic *Mind of
the South* (1941). Cash, of course, famously found that the South didn't
have a mind, but an identity defined by its rural culture, the upward
mobility of its poor-folk-become-planters in the nineteenth century, its
commitment to white supremacy, and yet profound interaction with the
black people who made its wealth and a good deal of its culture.

*The Mind of the South* memorably portrays the rise of southern
evangelicalism in the early nineteenth century. From its earliest days,
Cash wrote, southern evangelicalism was tied up with sin and
subordination, and with "a personal God, a God for the individualist, a
God whose representatives were not silken priests but preachers risen
from the people themselves." "What our Southerner required ... was a
faith as simple and emotional as himself," Cash wrote in one of his
characteristically exaggerated but trenchant summaries. [^1]

Thompson picks this up in her chapter "Jesusland," where she remembers
growing up in the East Point Christian Church of Atlanta. "Fierce
doctrinal battles" characterized the religion of her youth, as questions
of the exact theology and order of salvation, baptism, and communion
preoccupied believers (115). And perhaps the Supreme Court had declared
public school prayer unconstitutional in 1962, but Thompson remembers
plenty of school prayer in public schools in her Georgia childhood (as I
do of my Oklahoma childhood at close to the same time), as well as
school revivals and more or less constant public prayer "in Jesus'
name," from graduations to football games.

(A personal note: For years, I have been telling people the story of how
in my public grade school, in an all-white county, we were instructed to
"pray" for our senators to make the right decision about busing---i.e.,
to oppose it. We had school prayer and bible readings on precisely that
issue---most confusing to us in rural Oklahoma, where nearly everyone
came to school on buses transporting farm kids to one of only two towns
in the county. As I prayed, I also asked God to help the kids get to
school if they didn't have buses. Thompson grew up an urbanite, but I
think she would appreciate that story).

Similarly, Thompson writes that the "box" of southern identity has two
"constants," the "two great institutions that have defined the limits of
the available contents: evangelical religion and slavery." Of slavery,
Tocqueville said that "God alone can obliterate the traces of its
existence." But Thompson adds, "two hundred years later, God still
hasn't gotten around to it" (7--8). And that's true of evangelical
religion, too. And yet, the part of the box of southern identity
represented by those two is shrinking. As is true throughout the book,
Thompson finds that while the past is never dead, sometimes it does seem
"past," or amenable to change. A "more global, socially conscious
evangelicalism" is likely to replace the "fundamentalist influence on
evangelical religion," Thompson suggests, citing there an interview
conducted with historian Darren Dochuk of *From Bible Belt to Sunbelt*
fame (139).

This theme of a persistent but waning or changing "southern culture"
defines much of the best of the book. Early on, Thompson points out that
the famously "conservative" South is so in part because "because
tradition in the South is like beachfront property in an era of global
warming: as much as you love the view, you live with the knowledge that
some morning you will wake up and find it gone." Southerners "can't shut
up" about the past, which suggests something about how much "massive,
wrenching social change" they had been through (11).

Throughout the rest of the book, well-wrought passages and excellent
user-friendly summations of scholarly findings leaven the work. About
why southerners fought in the Civil War, for example, Thompson writes:
"Individually, they fought for a variety of reasons; collectively, they
fought to preserve and expand an economic system based on slavery." Yes,
of course, it's complicated, but that pretty well captures the last
generation or so of "why men fought in the Civil War" scholarship. As
for Civil War memory and textbooks, Thompson points out that for much of
the twentieth century defenders of the Lost Cause, especially the United
Daughters of the Confederacy, were the primary purveyors of "political
correctness." For decades "publishers of school textbooks went out of
their way not to offend delicate Southern sensibilities in their
treatment of the Civil War." Today, textbook publishers, eager not to
offend anyone, "don't perpetrate the Lost Cause myth, but they don't do
much to correct it, either" (52).

In the conclusion, Thompson traces how, gradually, the South is
disentangling itself from the Confederacy, and she hopes this suggests
progress in "dealing with aspects of race as the apply to us personally
without treating it like it's kryptonite" (233). If the South won't be
defined by the Confederacy, then what will define the region? Thompson
suggests "a sense of community forged under the conditions that obtained
in the South: reinforced by race-based laws, the tacit acknowledgment of
a hidden history, collective delusions, intense peer pressure, and a
pervasive religious atmosphere." And despite the Americanization of the
region, its being "urbanized, suburbanized, \[and\] strip-malled," the
region still "bears the imprint of that deep sense of community and an
almost tribal definition of kin" (234--35).

Maybe. But I'm skeptical, for the very reason that Thompson astutely
discusses earlier in the book: that wrenching, sweeping,
community-altering change is a central theme of southern history. Wilbur
J. Cash understood this as he traced how rough-and-tumble Scots-Irish
settlers wrested plantations out of newly seized lands, and within their
own lifetime had redefined themselves as planters bearing a regal
heritage. Faulkner knew that too, and told about that part of the South
in the epic novel *Absalom, Absalom*. And for a more recent era,
Thompson knows it too. Discussing the decline of community life in the
rural South, she discovers that this process has left a "population
skewed toward the very old, the very young, the chronically unemployed,
and---not least---the unhealthy" (151) She then discusses the kinds of
maps that I have summarized in chapter one of *[Moses, Jesus, and the
Trickster in the Evangelical South][]* (2012), showing that the "Bible
Belt" is also the obesity, diabetes, heart disease, divorce, alcoholism,
illiteracy, and gun violence Belt.

And so, if not community, then what defines the new mind of the South?
Religiosity does, I would argue. It's not quite the same religiosity as
before, and it's being altered by immigrants and also by the rise of a
more vocal class of "nones." But evangelicalism remains far more
characteristic of southern life than for any other region. The new mind
of the South, then, still has a fair portion of the old mind of the
South; there's some distance, but not a country mile, between Wilbur J.
Cash and Tracy Thompson.

[^1]: Wilbur J. Cash, *The Mind of the South* (1941; New York: Vintage
    Books, 1991), 56.

  [podcast]: http://jsr.fsu.edu/new-media/podcast/tracy-thompson.html
  [Blockhead Chronicles]: http://theblockheadchronicles.blogspot.com/
  [short post]: http://theblockheadchronicles.blogspot.com/2013/05/what-were-we-thinking.html
  [Moses, Jesus, and the Trickster in the Evangelical South]: http://paulharvey.org/moses
