---
layout: article
title: "Review: Strange Jeremiahs"
author-first: Terrence L.
author-last: Johnson
author: Terrence L. Johnson
author-note: "Terrence L. Johnson is an assistant professor of Religion at Haverford College."
vol: 15
year: 2013
book-reviewed: "Stewart, Carole Lynn. <em>Strange Jeremiahs: Civil 
Religion and the Literary Imagination of Jonathan Edwards, Herman 
Melville, and W.E.B. Du Bois</em>. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, 2010. xiv + 376 pp. ISBN 978-0-8263-4679-7. "
---

Carole Lynn Stewart's *Strange Jeremiahs* is a powerful defense of civil
religion as a rhetorical and epistemic device for exploring the
countering and overlapping public accounts of democracy. With clarity
and depth, Stewart offers the reader a rich landscape of the origins of
civil religion and its relationship to the American jeremiad. Turning to
Hannah Arendt, Stewart develops the political theorist's account of
revolution as a "religious event" to explore the cultural contexts in
and through which America attempted to transgress familiar political
borders as it struggled to realize the ideal of democracy in general and
liberty in particular.

Turning to Jonathan Edwards, Herman Melville, and W. E. B. Du Bois,
Stewart relies on these "Jeremiahs" to shed light on the nature of
religious rhetoric in establishing what she calls revolutionary
democracy. Stewart grounds her understanding of revolutionary democracy
within two major historical events: the American Revolution and the
Civil War. Stewart is not so much concerned about discovering a
particular moment or event to illustrate a decisive rupture from a
tragic and violent past, as she is with locating conceptual spaces that
reflect both the link to, and rupture from, the horrific legacy of
subjugation and slavery in America. She argues that "within this space,
there is the experience of a hiatus, discontinuity, an undefined
temporal order in which fragments, residues, and novelties may be
realized as the ne forms of freedom" (13).

In Edwards, Stewart discovers an articulation of the public self that
undermined the era's theological insistence on adhering to the covenant
as a central component of salvation. For Stewart, Edwards's focus on
conversion through the Holy Spirit signifies an effort to disrupt the
narrow public by expanding the range of persons with access and the
ability to transform public spheres.

Stewart retrieves Melville's writings to underscore the cultural and
theological emphasis of "moral regeneration" within the Second Great
Awakening. Unlike Edwards, who focused on conversion as it related to
public space and the public self, the theological backdrop for Melville
dictated a different approach: salvation as a private, familial affair.
With Melville, "there was also a moment away from the idea of original
sin as an ontologically defined theological limit, a limit in the
context of public space and diversity" (149).

Du Bois emerges in the text as what Cornel West calls a "towering"
figure, one in whom Stewart finds a descriptive account of, and
constructive response to, the nation's distorted understanding of itself
in relation to the ideal and unrealized promises of democracy. In a
rather provocative way, Stewart identifies the tension between the self
and community within Du Bois writings as signifying the moment of
rupture from the subjugated self to a liberated soul---or what Du Bois
calls in *The Souls of Black Folk* "soul-life." The insightful move by
Stewart allows the reader to imagine the possibility of freedom within
the bounds of the double self and the double aims of the country; i.e.,
liberty on the one hand, and slavery on the other.

Stewart offers a lucid account of the nature of civil religion and
revolutionary democracy within the particular literary historical
tradition of the jeremiad. She expands the discussion of civil religion,
by emphasizing the political implications of religious conversion, the
privatization of salvation, and the moral justification of slavery and
subjugation. As Stewart aptly asserts, revolutionary democracy will be
found in a variety of places, including the imaginations of a people
placed behind the veil, where resistance created the fragments from
which blacks established literary, religious, and political traditions
of American democracy.
