---
layout: article
title: "Review: South Carolina Women"
author-first: Karen M.
author-last: Kedrowski
author: Karen M. Kedrowski
author-note: "Karen M. Kedrowski is a professor of Political Science at Winthrop University."
vol: 15
year: 2013
book-reviewed: "Marjorie Julian Spruill, Valinda W. Littlefield, and Joan Marie Johnson, eds. <em>South Carolina Women: Their Lives and Times</em>. Volume 3. Athens: University of Georgia Press. 2012. xx + 460 pp. ISBN: 978-0-8203-4215-3. "
---

My hat is off to the editors and authors of *South Carolina Women*. They
have done an enormous service to anyone who is interested in South
Carolina history, women’s history, and southern history by compiling
telling stories of a group of fascinating women.

Volume 3 of *South Carolina Women* includes biographical profiles about
27 prominent South Carolina women. The book is organized in roughly
chronological order, with the earliest profile from the 1930s. Several
of the women included are still alive and were interviewed for this
volume.

Taken as a whole, *South Carolina Women* tells the story of women’s
history in the twentieth century. The women profiled were teachers,
librarians, nurses, and public health workers. They were mothers, wives,
widows, daughters, and spinsters. They were elected officials, business
owners, midwives, and academics. They came from a variety of
backgrounds: African American and white; working class, middle class,
poor, and society women. In addition, many were political and social
activists, engaging issues related to civil rights, labor, farming, and
women’s rights. As the volume moves forward in time, we see more women
in public life, punctuated by Jean Toal’s election as the Chief Justice
of the South Carolina Supreme Court and Mary Gordon Ellis becoming the
first woman elected to the South Carolina Senate.

The volume also includes women whose paths were unconventional,
including Louise Smith, a NASCAR driver; Julie and Alice Delk, who built
ships at the Charleston Navy Yard in World War II; and Mary Jane
Manigault, who pioneered the art and craft of sea grass basket weaving.

While the book features diverse women, the chapters reveal how these
women both reflected broader national trends and also operated within a
southern culture marked by conservatism, patriarchy, and racism. Several
authors noted that the women they profiled accommodated these biases by
dressing as a “proper” South Carolina woman should. By wearing dresses
and hats and gloves, their messages were more likely to have an impact
than if they dressed less traditionally. But despite the image of
domesticity, the message of reformers often had a steely resolve. Black
children in the state were educated in poorly constructed and meanly
supplied schools. Yet teachers in these schools instilled a desire for
independence, self-respect, pride, and self-improvement—topics that the
white power structure would not have embraced.

This book is an excellent resource for scholars and students of southern
and South Carolina history and politics, American studies,
African-American studies, and women’s studies. Scholars interested in
southern religion will appreciate the infusions of faith into these
accounts—many of them having a Protestant flavor, but we also learn
about Jean Toal’s Catholicism and Harriet Keyserling’s Judaism.
Moreover, the book is written in accessible prose and includes a number
of photographs of these remarkable women. Portions of the book would be
useful for undergraduate courses, and it will be an excellent resource
for libraries.

In short, I commend the authors and editors for making a valuable
contribution by documenting the lives and stories of these important
women.
