---
layout: article
title: "Review: Southern Crucifix, Southern Cross"
author-first: Jeffrey
author-last: Marlett
author: Jeffrey Marlett
author-note: "Jeffrey Marlett is an associate professor of Religious Studies at The College of Saint Rose."
vol: 15
year: 2013
book-reviewed: "Andrew H. M. Stern. Southern Crucifix, Southern Cross: Catholic-Protestant Relations in the Old South. Tuscaloosa: University of Alabama Press, 2012. xii + 268 pp. ISBN 978-0-81731-774-4. "
---

"Groundbreaking" appears so frequently that it obscures the works that
actually do achieve something new. Andrew Stern's *Southern Crucifix,
Southern Cross* does break new ground, specifically for a time and
region where customary stereotypes still hold sway. The antebellum South
was, presumably, a bastion of white Protestant hegemony. Outside of
Louisiana, coastal Alabama, Kentucky, and Maryland, Roman Catholics did
not figure prominently socially or politically. Stern instead asserts
southern Catholic strength and inclusion. Catholic and Protestants
cooperated readily in several elements of antebellum southern life,
including, but extending beyond, a defense of slavery.

Randall Miller and Jon Wakelyn first challenged this trope with their
anthology *Catholics in the Old South* (1983, 1999). Southern Catholics
certainly contributed to southern life while wrestling with their own
involvement with slavery. This important early study nevertheless
adhered to a presumption of southern Catholic outsiderness. While
referencing Miller and Wakelyn's study, Stern dismisses this assumption,
which he insists stems from American Catholic history's preoccupation
with the immigrant church of the urban northeast and upper-midwest. This
history and the anti-Catholic reaction such as the Charlestown Ursuline
convent burning and Maria Monk's "awful disclosures" combine to mask
from Catholic and southern historians alike the reality of religious
cooperation in the antebellum South (3--5).

Prior to the Civil War, American Catholics remained somewhat evenly
distributed; northern diocese outnumbered southern ones only twenty-two
to fifteen. Slave-owning border states like Kentucky contained
widespread and vibrant Catholic populations (6). Stern moves away from
the customary foci---Baltimore and New Orleans---and examines primarily
Louisville, Charleston, and Mobile. These smaller cities housed sizeable
Catholic populations, yet small enough to require constant contact with
Protestant neighbors. The Louisville diocese (originally founded at
Bardstown in 1808) included Catholic settlers who had arrived with the
earliest Protestants and, like them, lived off hunting and farming. By
mid-century Louisville had become the twelfth largest city in the
country; its diverse, industrialized economy thrived, just like
northeastern cities, due to Catholic immigrant workers. Charleston,
South Carolina, remained a city of the planter aristocracy and thus the
South's least industrialized city. Nevertheless, by 1855, Catholic
immigrants comprised roughly forty percent of the city's white
population. Charleston's ethnically diverse Catholic parishes testified
to the city's social diversity. Mobile, Alabama, predated both
Charleston and Louisville, and thus featured French and Spanish
influences older than either white Protestant merchants or mid-century
Catholic immigrants (10-13). While the colonial era witnessed a
Protestant, particularly Anglican, political ascendency that banned
Catholics from office, the nineteenth century witnessed far greater
cooperation.

Overall, antebellum southern Catholics enjoyed good relations with their
Protestant neighbors. They cared for each other since they lived,
studied, worshipped, and ruled together. They did so even though
Catholic bishops increasingly voiced ultramontanist---i.e.,
pro-papal---sentiments. Therefore, Catholics maintained their
reputations as good Americans and southerners, while in the urban North
the same factors usually sparked intense doubts over Catholic
assimilation.

The South's climate of toleration grew from practical circumstances. In
smaller cities like Louisville, Mobile, and Charleston, elites of both
religious communities commingled as equals, comforting and mourning
together. Whereas in the colonial period, Catholicism could be
associated with imperial powers like Spain and France, in the antebellum
period Catholic southerners sided with their Protestant neighbors
against common enemies like Indians, the British, rebellious slaves, and
eventually the North.

Through this cooperation, Catholic southerners set about building their
own religious enterprises beyond the parish church: first the school,
and then institutions serving the common good like charities for the
poor, hospitals, and orphanages. Protestants recognized that these
endeavors could serve their own needs. They therefore donated financial
support to Catholic organizations and enrolled their children in
Catholic schools. Several Catholics died serving the region's sick,
which garnered greater respect for the Church.

The constant drive to create separate Catholic schools led to the
southern Church's ethnic diversity, as clergy and religious orders from
Europe, including post-revolutionary France, came to teach. Still, given
the fewer Catholic elites outside Baltimore and New Orleans, Catholic
schools needed---and received---ample assistance from Protestant donors.
This assistance even extended to places of worship, as growing Catholic
parishes often shared space with local Protestant congregations. These
sorts of religious exchanges opened doors for curious antebellum
religious seekers to experiment with Catholicism.

Finally, Catholics participated fully in southern slavery. Across the
region both clergy and laypeople owned slaves. Anti-Catholic violence
erupted in the 1850s in both northern and southern cities as a reaction
against seemingly incessant immigration from Ireland and Germany. In the
South, though, anti-Catholic groups like the "Know-Nothings" were
quickly labeled as northern abolitionist thugs. This in turn cast
Catholics as fellow southerners harassed by northern intrusiveness.
Being fully immersed in southern life, as secession approached Catholics
largely sided with the short-lived Confederacy. For Protestant
southerners, Catholic enthusiasm for the cause placed their loyalties
beyond reproach.

With this book, Stern firmly moves beyond conventional historiographical
presumptions. His command of documentary evidence is both impressive and
an invitation for further research. Upper-level undergraduates, graduate
students, and interested readers alike will enjoy his clear writing and
exhaustive examples. Given the regional claim made, one might quibble
over expanding beyond three smaller cities to "the South" writ large.
Stern recognizes this, maintaining the connection to the South's grand
Catholic centers like New Orleans. Still, this book's success prompts
the question: "What happened next?" By the 1940s much of the South was
considered "no priest land." Therefore, a future study of southern
Catholics in the rural South excepting Louisiana will need to build from
Stern's work.
