---
author: 'Michael J. McVicar'
author-first: 'Michael J.'
author-last: McVicar
author-note: |
    Michael J. McVicar is an assistant professor of Religion at Florida
    State University.
layout: article
title: |
    Take Away the Serpents from Us: The Sign of Serpent Handling and the
    Development of Southern Pentecostalism
vol: 15
year: 2013
---

## Introduction [^1] {#introduction-1}

Few religious groups in the United States are more readily recognizable
than serpent-handling Christians.[^2] Many Americans are familiar with
grainy black and white photographs or jerky videos of sweaty, wild-eyed
worshippers, who cram into hot, rundown rural churches where they
proceed to speak in tongues, roll around on the floor, slather one
another with oil, and fondle rattlesnakes, copperheads, and the rare
king cobra. Sensational tales of death, endangered children, booze, and
fanaticism abound in the popular media's coverage of the practice.ii
Serpent-handling Christians regularly appear as main characters in
newspaper articles, novels, and television shows.[^3] Even in the
academy, social scientists have a long history of taking up snake
handlers as research subjects. Sociologists and psychologists frequently
approach handlers as useful subjects that illustrate psychoanalytic,
commitment, and role theories. [^4]

* * * * *

![Image 1][]

*Snake Handling in Lejunior, Kentucky, September 15, 1946. Russell Lee,
courtesy the National Archives and Records Administration.*

Visual media, such as Russell Lee’s photography for the United States
Department of Interior in the late 1940s, have solidified the iconic
otherness of serpent handling for many Americans. The Interior
Department hired Lee to record images of the living conditions in
Kentucky’s coalfields. Lee’s work as part of the Medical Survey of the
Bituminous Coal Industry (1946-1947), now in the public domain,
circulate widely on the Internet and are available on may websites.
Lee’s original caption to this photo read, “Handling of serpents, a part
of the ceremony at the Pentecostal Church of God. This coal camp offers
none of the modern types of amusement and many of the people attend the
services of this church more for the mass excitement and emotionalism
than because of belief in the tenets of this church. Lejunior, Harlan
County, Kentucky, 09/15/1946.”

* * * * *

Despite the disproportional attention in popular media outlets and
interest among social scientists, serpent-handling Christians remain
relatively understudied by scholars of American religious history. While
notable exceptions to this generalization exist, scholars in the
humanities generally relegate serpent handlers to one or another
subfield of study.[^5] Historians, for example, tend to portray handlers
as a unique, nearly autonomous subset of the holiness-pentecostal
movement.[^6] In the end, although many scholarly narratives recognize
that serpent handling developed from the convergence of folk, holiness,
and pentecostal traditions in the South, most scholarship represents
serpent handling as a mysterious and more or less *sui generis*
phenomenon in the historiography of American religion.

This essay reassesses serpent handling's place in the history of the
early holiness-pentecostal movement.[^7] It explores the problem the
five signs enumerated in the Gospel of Mark 16:15--18---speaking in
tongues, healing the sick, casting out demons, handling snakes, and
drinking poison---posed for pentecostals in the South during the first
half of the twentieth century. [^8] Close readings of early
twentieth-century printed sources from the holiness-pentecostal and
secular presses indicate that authors and audiences viewed serpent
handling as a new, innovative, and threatening religious practice. The
arguments documented in these sources suggest that the identification of
serpent handling as a specific practice limited to a small religious
subgroup helped establish the boundaries of what today are generally
recognized as legitimate pentecostal worship in the United States.
Ultimately, these processes of socio-symbolic differentiation inside
pentecostalism paralleled the legal construction of snake handlers as
criminals whose bodies and behavior required regulation through
ecclesiastic and state disciplinary mechanisms.

This historiographic reassessment of serpent handling moves through
three distinct parts. First, the essay argues that serpent handling
emerged as a problem for a number of religious groups in the South as
the pentecostal revival spread into the region. Most significantly,
under the oversight of A. J. Tomlinson (1865--1943), the Church of God,
based in Cleveland, Tennessee, advocated for the handling of snakes
while some of its early leaders directly engaged in the practice. As a
result of the Church of God's acceptance of the practice, other
pentecostal-inspired groups in the South---most notably the Assemblies
of God and the Pentecostal Holiness Church---also had to contend with
the significance of handling snakes. Part one of this essay tracks how
the Church of God used serpent handling to attack their rivals while
other pentecostal groups warned their members to beware the fanatics in
the Church of God. By highlighting efforts to embrace or reject serpent
handling, part one explores how the practice helped create important
boundaries between legitimate and extreme forms of worship *within*
various church polities. The creation of these boundaries helped many
pentecostals resist the imposition of pejorative designations such as
"holy roller" to label *all* spirit-filled Christians. As pentecostal
groups debated the validity of the controversial practices associated
with Mark 16, they developed more precise categories for identifying
different practices and theologies related to the Markan signs. This
process of differentiation eventually led to the creation of *snake* or
*serpent* handling as a distinct form of worship recognized by
pentecostals and the wider American public.[^9]

Part two of this essay traces the rejection of snake handling by the
Church of God as it came into alignment with other major pentecostal
denominations during the 1920s. Following a split with Tomlinson, the
Church of God's leaders adopted the logic of other interpreters who
argued that the signs mentioned in Mark refer to the *accidental*
handling of serpents. Leaders now dismissed those who *willfully* took
up snakes as fanatics and showmen. Although nearly a decade passed
before favorable references to serpent handling disappeared from church
publications, most church leaders did eventually condemn the practice.
The second part of the essay closes in the 1940s as Church of God
leaders joined other major pentecostal bodies in calling for state
authorities to criminalize snake handling.

Part three turns away from the pentecostal-holiness press to explore
journalistic depictions of serpent handling recorded in non-church
affiliated sources from the 1910s to the 1950s. From the 1910s through
1930s, the earliest stories in the popular press conflated serpent
handling with holy roller and holiness worship to highlight the
perceived absurdity and danger of the entire pentecostal revival in the
South. By the 1940s and 1950s, however, this tendency to flatten
pentecostal-holiness religious practices into a singular category gave
way to reporting that pathologized snake handling as a unique
aberration. Using concepts drawn from post-World War II anthropology and
Cold War-era social sciences, journalists characterized serpent-handling
Christians as brainwashed rural cultists who shared traits with other
primitive religious groups found around the world. This later reporting
coincided not only with the unanimous rejection of the practice by
organized pentecostal churches, but also with state efforts to regulate
the practice out of concern for public safety.

At no point does this essay suggest that all or even many
holiness-pentecostal groups seriously considered serpent handling as a
legitimate practice. In fact, there is little evidence in the historical
record that any group other than the Church of God condoned the
practice. The purpose of reconsidering the historiographic import of
serpent handling is two-fold. First, early southern
holiness-pentecostalism was an ad hoc, dynamic movement that emerged as
people, interests, theologies, and bodily practices circulated through
competing social institutions. Serpent handling---along with the Church
of God's attempt to appropriate it and the other churches' steadfast
work to reject it---was a manifestation of a particular moment in
southern religious history. The practice of snake handling developed in
the early twentieth century as a confluence of folk tradition, religious
revival, and theological reflection on the signs listed in Mark 16.
[^10] Second, the eventual consensus among pentecostal denominations to
reject the practice suggests that serpent handling played an important
but unexplored role in creating popular distinctions in the ways some
Americans imagined the limits of religion and its popular practice in
the United States. Most notably, the rejection of serpent handling by
most religious bodies paralleled the criminalization of certain forms of
worship and contributed to popular imaginings of Appalachia as a
regional and cultural "other" in the United States.

## I. Holy Rollers and the Problem of Signs

Before delving into the problem of serpent handling as it emerged in the
early pentecostal revival of the South, it is worth considering the
place of the practice in historical scholarship. Since the 1970s, much
of the scholarship on serpent handling has tended to frame the practice
as marginalized and at odds with the prevailing theological trends and
ritual practices that dominated holiness-pentecostalism in the early
twentieth century. [^11] For example, in a scare-quote laden section of
the first edition of *The Holiness-Pentecostal Movement in the United
States* (1971), Vinson Synan singled out the "cult of snake-handlers" as
the "extremists" primarily responsible for the atmosphere of "prejudice,
hostility, and suspicion [that] would mar the relationship of the early
pentecostals to society at large." [^12] Synan dismissed the practice's
connection to the wider holiness-pentecostal milieu, arguing that it
emerged spontaneously in "mountain sects which have no connection with
the major pentecostal denominations." [^13] Similarly, Robert Mapes
Anderson's *Vision of the Disinherited* (1979) dismissed the "extreme
phenomena" of snake and fire handling, which he argued were "restricted
in practice to Pentecostals in the most backward and culturally isolated
regions of the Ozarks and the lower Appalachians." [^14] Unlike Synan,
Mapes conceded that some early pentecostal denominations recognized
these practices, but he ultimately dismissed them as "sanctioned by
time-honored folkways" that were not directly connected to the
theological and social issues raised by the wider holiness-pentecostal
revival. [^15]

More recent studies focusing on religion in Appalachia have given
serpent handling more attention. Deborah Vansau McCauley's *Appalachian
Mountain Religion* (1995) dealt with serpent handling in order to
correct popular misconceptions that have "elevated" it "to the position
of being the primary representative of what is special and unique about
'religion in Appalachia.'" [^16] In contrast to McCauley's corrective
narrative, Randall J. Stephens's *The Fire Spreads* (2008) situated the
problem of serpent handling squarely within the context of controversies
associated with the holiness-pentecostal revival of the first quarter of
the twentieth century. Echoing Mapes, Stephens relegated serpent
handling to "a small fraction of white southern pentecostals, isolated
in the Appalachian Mountains and their foothills." [^17]

This brief summary suggests that much of the historical literature on
serpent handling rests on two basic assumptions about the practice: 1)
generally, historians do not consider serpent handling to be an
important component of the southern holiness-pentecostal revival; and,
2) when historians do address handling they often end their narratives
by safely circumscribing the practice to the lower Appalachians:
America's imagined landscape of primordial otherness. [^18] In contrast
to this scholarly consensus, primary sources from the first half of the
twentieth century suggest that the early pioneers of the
holiness-pentecostal revival recognized serpent handling as a problem
worthy of consideration. Many important publications of the
holiness-pentecostal press---especially the Church of God's *The Church
of God Evangel*, the Stone Church's *The Latter Rain Evangel*, and
Assemblies of God's *The Pentecostal Evangel*---discussed Mark 16: 15-18
extensively. [^19] At the root of the controversy was a dispute over the
various "signs" of baptism by the Holy Spirit---namely, speaking in
tongues, healing the sick, casting out demons, handling snakes, and
drinking poison---as indications of spiritual power. Within wider
debates over the legitimacy of the Markan signs, serpent handling, for
many church leaders and laypeople alike, was not simply an expression of
primitive Appalachian folk culture. Rather, for some it was a modern
symbol of God's progressive, unfolding plan for humanity. For others it
was a morbid circus trick that embodied the values of a sick modern
culture enamored with individualism, showmanship, and media sensation
that tarnished the public's wider perception of the spreading revival.
Either way, for many early pentecostals and their critics, the handling
of poisonous snakes in religious meetings was distinctly modern and
required explanation.

* * * * *

![Image 2][]

*Church of God Elders Council, October 4-17, 1917. Seated: A. J.
Tomlinson and Blanche Koon. Standing left to right: M.S. Lemons, T. S.
Payne, T. L. McLain, F. J. Lee, Sam C. Perry, George T. Brouayer, E. J.
Boehmer, J. B. Ellis, S. W. Latimer, S. O. Gillaspie, and M. S. Haynes.
Courtesy Hal Bernard Dixon Jr. Pentecostal Research Center.*

Of the fourteen prominent early leaders of the Church of God pictured,
existing sources indicate that at least three were present during
revivals in which serpents were handled: J. B. Ellis, George T.
Brouayer, M. S. Lemons. Ellis and Lemons were critical of serpent
handling, but ultimately accepted Tomlinson’s promotion of the practice
until 1921. Brouayer, Tenessee State Overseer, is notable because he and
Hensley led a revival during the Church of God’s 1915 General Assembly.
Evangel accounts record that two of those pictured personally handled
snakes during revivals: T. L. McLain and M. S. Haynes. Haynes, a Bishop
in the church, helped Hensley conduct his infamous 1914 revival that
helped solidify serpent handling’s place the in Church of God. Finally,
Tomlinson, while there is no record he ever handled snakes, was the
leading proponent of the practice in the church.

* * * * *

If there is an area where the sources line up with historical consensus,
it is in terms of the number of snake handlers. The practice never
captured the imagination---or the bodies---of the majority of Christians
swept up in the outpouring of the Holy Spirit. The population of serpent
handlers has probably never amounted to more than a few thousand, and in
the early days handlers likely numbered in the low hundreds. But this
small number of serpent handlers generated a disproportionate amount of
interest among leaders in the Church of God, one of the largest and most
significant churches in the holiness-pentecostal revival. Between 1916
and 1932, many prominent leaders in the Church of God's hierarchy
actively handled serpents and many more wrote and spoke in defense of
the practice. During this period, no less than seven State Overseers of
the Church of God handled snakes during revival meetings. [^20]
Tomlinson, the church's first General Overseer, developed a theological
justification for the practice that many handlers reference to this day.
Further, the Church of God's initial acceptance of the practice led to
conflict with other pentecostal bodies and became an important wedge
issue Church of God ministers used to distinguish themselves from other
pentecostals. At the same time, the development of wire news services
ensured that handling would escape the constraints of the church that
nurtured it to become a regional practice and a national curiosity. In
short, much of the current scholarship on the holiness-pentecostal
tradition in the South provides not only an insufficient assessment of
the practice in the early history holiness-pentecostalism, but it also
fails to consider how handling related to larger cultural trends in the
United States, including popular imaginings of Appalachia as a site of
regional otherness and normative conceptions of the limits of religious
practice. The remainder of this essay seeks to outline how the contested
explanations and justifications for handling poisonous snakes in
religious meetings led to the creation of snake or serpent handling as a
distinct form of worship both in the minds of pentecostals and in the
minds of the wider American public.

### Living Signboards

In the early twentieth century, many southern holiness-pentecostals
understood baptism by the Holy Spirit in terms of a question Charles Fox
Parham (1873--1929) posed to his Topeka-based Bethel Bible School
students. In December 1900, he asked a small group of his students what
"indisputable proof" of Holy Spirit baptism might look like. [^21] After
studying the second chapter of Acts, they all offered the same response:
the proof of Holy Spirit baptism came when the ancient apostles "spoke
with other tongues." [^22] Through the ministry of African-American
holiness preacher William Joseph Seymour (1870--1922), the Topeka
interpretation of the sign of tongues spread to a national---and
eventually international---audience. Although nuances regarding the
validity of certain experiences separated Seymour and Parham, the two
men cultivated what would become a widely-held belief in pentecostalism:
Spirit baptism is followed by clear and unmistakable signs that attest
to its reality. In Los Angeles in 1906, the blind, soft-spoken Seymour
initiated the raucous, emotionally charged Azusa Street Revival. It met
three times a day, seven days a week, and lasted for three and one-half
years. [^23] Although the *Los Angeles Times* ridiculed Seymour's "weird
doctrine" of "the gift of tongues" as little more than "howlings" and
"babel," by the hundreds and then thousands, people adopted the
"restoration of Pentecostal power" manifested in the embodied signs of
the rapidly growing movement. [^24]

Emphasis on signs ensured that the early pentecostal movement developed
into a "semeiocracy." [^25] It was a community ordered---at least
partially---according to a regime of carefully cultivated bodily signs.
These signs allowed the community to *read* the fact of one's Holy
Spirit baptism. While Parham's students detected the proof of the third
blessing of Spirit baptism in the "other tongues" described in Acts
2:1--4, early pentecostals also turned to Mark 16:15--18 for a fuller
typography of the signs accompanying the Holy Spirit. Theologians John
Christopher Thomas and Kimberly Ervin Alexander's survey of pentecostal
publications from the first two decades of the twentieth century
revealed that "the earliest Pentecostals saw the M[ar]k 16 text as a
kind of litmus test for the authenticity of their experience." [^26] The
text's "unrivaled" position in the early movement guaranteed that the
embodied signs it enumerated would become essential symbols of one's
status not only as a follower of Christ but also signified one's
relative stature within the emerging community. [^27]

Gaston B. Cashwell (1860--1916) played a pivotal role in bringing
Seymour's brand of pentecostal worship to the South and inadvertently
influenced the development of serpent handling. Cashwell preached a
message that synthesized the "second blessing" or "sanctification" of
holiness with the "evidence" of speaking in other tongues. Cashwell's
message helped lay the theological and institutional foundation for the
Pentecostal Holiness Church in the Carolinas. Further, Cashwell's
teachings had a direct influence on Tomlinson, then a leader of a small
holiness group in the Unicoi Mountains of Tennessee and North Carolina,
which would become the Church of God. [^28] After hearing Cashwell's
message, Tomlinson described his struggle to embody these new signs. "I
ceased not to preach that it was our privilege to receive the Holy Ghost
and speak in tongues as they did on the day of Pentecost. I did not have
the experience, so I was almost always among the altar seekers." [^29]
The pursuit of baptism consumed him, as he "was so hungry for the Holy
Ghost that I scarcely cared for food, friendship or anything else."
[^30] He was rewarded with an intense experience. He claimed that he
levitated, shook, and fell to the floor. He spoke in "ten different
languages," miraculously traveled to numerous countries, and saw a
vision of some great, bloody future conflict. Following this experience,
Tomlinson made signs and miracles a key feature of his rapidly growing
movement.

Before trading the Unicoi Mountains for the nearby city of Cleveland,
Tennessee, in 1905, most of Tomlinson's followers resided in distant
mountain communities in the rural areas of "Monroe, Polk, Bradley, and
McMinn counties in East Tennessee and Cherokee County in Western North
Carolina." [^31] According to historian Mickey Crews, early church
members "tended to live outside the social and economic mainstream. Just
as Appalachia was on the periphery of the South, they too lived on the
fringe of the dominant society." [^32] The church's earliest preachers
and converts tended to be poor, rural whites with little education and
few means. [^33] Many were critical of the industrialization of
Appalachia and skeptical of the middle-class values associated with
urban life.

The manifestation of signs not only created distinctions between
pentecostals and non-pentecostals, but also between competing
pentecostal groups. From the earliest days of Parham's Topeka outpouring
of the Latter Rain to Seymour's Azusa Street revival, pentecostals
exhibited a broad consensus that the manifestation of "tongues"
indicated one's baptism by the Holy Spirit. Yet, within this wide
consensus, individual signs could be interpreted narrowly or broadly,
therefore creating boundaries between groups and reinforcing hierarchies
within various groups. For instance, as religious studies scholar Ann
Taves has noted, Parham and Seymour disagreed over which tongues counted
as true signs of Holy Spirit baptism. Taves noted, "Parham believed that
the authentic 'bible evidence' was always in a human language unknown to
the speaker." [^34] In contrast, Seymour "viewed a much wider range of
experiences as authentic." [^35] The struggle to define these symbolic
differences and efforts to control the circulation of these signs (and
the bodies that manifested them) led to shifting allegiances and
conflicts within early pentecostalism.

For southern pentecostals, such as those affiliated with Tomlinson's
Church of God, controversies over the nature and meaning of signs became
a significant aspect of the new movement's development. Tomlinson was
especially concerned with signs, and dedicated a large amount of his
prolific writing to the subject. He saw signs as an essential component
of Christian history and made them a cornerstone of his growing church.
"Signs," he wrote, "are made prominent in the Bible from the beginning
to end. God gave Noah the sign of the bow in the sky. He gave Abraham
the sign of circumcision. The signs God gave to Moses to convince the
people of the power of God.... The New Testament signs will continue
until the Lord's people are finally delivered." [^36] Signs, therefore,
not only helped establish one's position within the Church of God, but
they also bestowed a sense of spiritual power to many of the Church of
God's otherwise economically and socially impoverished members.
Tomlinson enthusiastically embraced Cashwell's holiness synthesis and
aggressively popularized a pentecostal theology because the tongues of
Acts and the signs of Mark formed a reservoir of spiritual and social
power for the members of the rapidly growing Church of God. The
collective pursuit of signs distinguished Tomlinson's followers from
their rapidly changing surroundings. Signs separated them from the
market and industrial forces reshaping Appalachia and highlighted their
divergence from the long-established religious bodies in the region.

Tomlinson's followers translated his emphasis on the disciplined
cultivation of embodied signs into the popular idiom of modern
advertising. One Church of God member from Chattanooga told readers of
the widely circulated *Church of God Evangel* that, just as "we walk
down the street and see signs in front of the store, [and] we expect to
find what they are advertising," Christians too "are living signboards"
who can be identified by outward manifestations of their inner faith.
[^37] Signs such as "speaking in tongues and taking up serpents"
function as advertisements broadcasting either godliness or sinfulness.
[^38] "There are many wrong signs. Confusion is not a sign of
godliness.... Then if you have the sign of confusion up, take it
down.... The world is reading your sign." [^39] If one is to be read as
Christian, the author argued, one must accumulate and display the full
range of Markan signs---"taking up serpents" included---as an index of a
distinct Christian life.

So what happened? How did taking up serpents, a practice once casually
and unproblematically mentioned on the same symbolic level as speaking
in tongues, transition from being a "sign of godliness" to one of
"confusion" in the minds of many southern pentecostals associated with
the Church of God? How and why did serpent handling cease being one of
the acceptable Markan signs? How did it become a dangerous practice not
befitting respectable pentecostals? To answer these questions, one must
trace the ways in which members of the church developed mechanisms for
evaluating embodied signs, regulating their practice, and determining
their relative value within their respective social structures. This
evaluative process emerged from engagement with popular media sources
(especially newspaper reporting) and secular authorities. Members of the
Church of God and other churches worked to build a community of
believers simultaneously set apart from the dangerous and corrupting
influences of mainstream culture and distinct from the extreme
fractiousness of those who insisted that Jesus commanded the handling of
poisonous snakes.

### Signs and Miracles

Historian Randall Stephens has noted that holiness newspapers provided a
crucial medium for spreading the pentecostal revival throughout the
South. "The immediacy of newspapers," Stephens has argued, "and the ways
in which they allowed individuals throughout the U. S. to correspond
with one another made them an unusually potent medium." [^40] Following
Benedict Anderson, Stephens noted how the mass production of cheap
newspapers helped "the emerging pentecostal community" foster an
imagined sense of homogeneity and simultaneity across space and time.
[^41] These journals questioned the sufficiency of other modes of
religiosity to express a fully sanctified Christian life, and, most
importantly for this essay, helped create a common system for
interpreting manifestations of Holy Spirit baptism.

Even as these publications provided an important mechanism for forging a
collective, imagined identity for the growing pentecostal churches of
the South, they also recorded debates over how this emerging community
would and could imagine its limits. Within these debates, popular
journals helped establish which signs would freely circulate as embodied
expressions of Spirit baptism. For example, Stephens pointed out that as
older southern holiness advocates clashed with the pentecostal
newcomers, these publications recorded conflicts "between non-tongues
speaking holiness people and pentecostals" as they battled over claims
of "authentic" and "complete" experiences of God's sanctifying grace.
[^42]

Not surprisingly, as word of serpent handling spread in the
holiness-pentecostal press, the controversial practice also became a
contested sign of Holy Spirit baptism. These sources recorded the early
history and diffusion of serpent handling in Appalachia while also
illuminating the complex processes of symbolic differentiation that
eventually influenced popular, non-pentecostal understandings of this
controversial sign. Although many publications associated with southern
pentecostalism commented on serpent handling, few lavished it with more
attention---and praise---than *The Church of God Evangel*, the official
publication of the Church of God (Cleveland). Edited and published by
Tomlinson, *Evangel* appeared in 1910 and grew apace with the church. By
1914 *Evangel* was a weekly, newspaper-format publication and at the end
of the decade it claimed more than 15,000 subscribers. [^43]

On September 12, 1914, an anonymous note appeared in *Evangel*: "Bro.
George Hensley is conducting a revival at the tabernacle in Cleveland,
Tenn. It began the last Saturday in Aug. and is still continuing with
increasing interest. The power has been falling and souls crying out to
God. Twice during the meeting Serpents have been handled by the Saints."
[^44] Reports of the revival soon found their way into a series of
secular newspapers making George Went Hensley a regional celebrity.
[^45] The few existing sources make it difficult to discern Hensley's
motivation for taking up serpents, but it is easier to understand why
Hensley's innovation eventually received considerable attention from
early leaders in the southern pentecostal movement. [^46] Hensley
commenced his revival just as a generation of church leaders began
defining the nature and meaning of "signs" associated with baptism by
the Holy Spirit.

Scholars have long speculated that snake handling---as both a religious
ritual and a folk practice---predated Hensley by perhaps a decade, but
apparently religious leaders did not feel a need to record earlier
incidents of snake handling at coal camps or in brush arbor meetings.
[^47] The earliest references to serpent handling appeared in
non-southern sources. [^48] Secular news sources from 1909 reported on a
"queer sect" of "snake worshippers" in Hutchinson, Kansas, that allowed
snakes to bite one another during worship services. [^49] These accounts
did not frame the worshippers as holy rollers and did not regard them as
pentecostal even though the handlers quoted in these reports directly
appealed to a pentecostal logic for handling snakes and specifically
cited the "signs" of Mark 16. [^50] For their part, the "snake
worshippers" self-identified as the "True Followers of Jesus of Christ."
As with Hensley's later embrace of the practice, these earliest accounts
suggest that a certain convergence of reading, healing, and preaching
strategies connected to Mark 16---in conjunction with attention from the
popular press---led to the development of the practice in the early
twentieth century. The Hutchinson church attracted attention because it
allowed children to handle snakes and at least one church member had
gone "missing" (likely died, but the sources are not clear on this
issue) as a result of handling snakes in church.

By the 1910s, however, as more and more pentecostals throughout the
South debated Holy Spirit baptism, secular and religious media alike
appropriated this new practice into the holy roller phenomenon. If in
the 1909 accounts of serpent handling reporters failed to connect the
practice to holy rollers, by 1913 reports in Texas and Georgia
newspapers did make the connection. These stories recounted events in
northeastern Alabama and specifically related them to a series of "Holy
Roller" revivals near Sand Mountain. One story described children
handling snakes. [^51] Two others told of a Rev. James Halsop's death
following a series of snakebites as he tried to pull a rattlesnake from
a bag. Halsop's death appears to be the first recorded that is clearly
attributable to serpent handling. [^52]

Despite this earlier spotty evidence of several groups taking up
serpents as a result of their contact with holiness-pentecostal
theology, the sensation caused by Hensley's 1914 revival has become
synonymous with the origin of serpent handling. [^53] In many ways,
Hensley embodied the target demographic of the early Church of God.
Before he began handling snakes, Hensley was an illiterate moonshiner
with no permanent residence who supplemented his ill-gotten income by
working variously as a miner, a lumberjack, and as a factory worker.
Like many other early Church of God members, Hensley had roots in rural
mountain communities in West Virginia and Tennessee. [^54] Many of these
communities were more-or-less homogeneous, made up mostly of poor whites
from the same economic and educational strata of society. They worked in
coal mines, as day laborers, semi-skilled factory laborers, or rural
subsistence farmers. Initially, in the early 1900s, the Church of God
preached almost exclusively to these communities in Appalachia. Indeed,
as some scholars have noted, there seems to be a complex relationship
between industrialization, greater mobility, social change, and the
explosion of the holy roller revival in the South. [^55] These changing
patterns of communication and transportation brought men like Hensley
into contact with the Church of God and became the primary channels for
spreading serpent handling.

Given Hensley's apparent appeal to this target audience, it is hardly
surprising that a week following the initial report of the revival,
Tomlinson's lead *Evangel* article, "Sensational Demonstrations,"
discussed the sign of serpent handling at length. [^56] Tomlinson
reported that he was told, "the saints had been handling snakes and that
it was creating quite a sensation." [^57] The more Tomlinson asked about
the revival, the more interesting the story became. First, Hensley had
preached on all of the signs listed in Mark 16:18. Next he prophesied
that some rabble-rouser would bring a snake for the saints to handle.
The following night an unbeliever brought a rattlesnake which several
saints handled "and no one was injured by it. Some were bitten, but with
no damage to them." [^58] After this successful sign, "outsiders got
enthused and wanted to test the matter further. So on Sunday night Sept.
sixth they took in a 'Copperhead.'" [^59] The saints successfully
handled this snake too. News of these demonstrations generated "large
audiences." [^60]

Had Tomlinson's engagement with serpent handling ended with a single
article, it is likely Hensley's revival would have been as easily
forgotten as the Hutchinson and Sand Mountain churches. Instead,
Tomlinson continued to write about the practice and used it in his
outreach to the local media. Tomlinson's reason for embracing serpent
handling grew from the competition between various pentecostal groups
hoping to legitimize the relative intensity of their respective Holy
Spirit baptisms through the manifestation of signs. "A letter from some
uniformed personality," Tomlinson reported to readers, "found its way to
my desk recently which stated that the Church of God people were far in
the rear in regard to manifestations of the presence and power of God
and the salvation of souls. It stated that God was evidencing His
approval of other 'apostolic movements' far more than the Church of
God." [^61] To concede that the Church of God had fallen behind in the
manifestation of signs would have been an admission of the church's
deficit of symbolic capital. Not to be outdone, Tomlinson emphasized
that the church had manifested basic signs such as glossolalia and
divine healing. Then he upped the symbolic ante. "During the past year,"
wrote Tomlinson, "new experiences have materialized. In several
instances, as has been noted in the paper, fire has been handled by
several parties." [^62] Along with fire handling, Tomlinson also noted,
"the saints had been handling poison snakes." [^63] Later in 1914,
Tomlinson doubled-down on serpent handling at the Church of God's Tenth
General Assembly in Cleveland, telling the church's leaders, "Wild
poison serpents have been taken up and handled and fondled over almost
like babies with no harm to the saints. In several instances fire has
been handled with bare hands without [the saints] being burned. ... [I]
Have seen no reports of anybody outside the Church of God performing
this miracle." [^64]

The following year, Tomlinson elevated serpent handling up the semeiotic
hierarchy above the more commonly practiced signs. "The past year,"
wrote Tomlinson, "has been one of progress which has led us into many
miraculous things. Quite a number have been able under the power of God
to take up serpents and thus demonstrate the power of God to a
gainsaying world." [^65] With the emphasis on "progress," Tomlinson
indicated that handling emerged out of lower signs such as divine
healing and speaking in tongues. Later in a 1917 speech before the
Thirteenth General Assembly, Tomlinson reiterated the Church's support
for the practice. "The Church of God," he insisted, "stands
uncompromisingly for the signs and miracles, and upholds the taking up
of serpents and handling fire under the proper conditions." [^66]

From 1914 to 1920, Tomlinson authored no less than eighteen lead
*Evangel* articles touting the sign of serpent handling. [^67] In the
same period, he also published at least 53 reports of serpent handling
authored by revival leaders, preachers, and laypeople. [^68] These short
revival testimonies and conversion accounts, written in bursts of
evangelical fervor from the frontline of the "battlefield for God," tell
of revival meetings full of all manner of miraculous signs. [^69] A
representative dispatch recounted: "Hot lamp chimneys were handled and
some handled the hot torch without hurt. Large snakes were brought in...
and were successfully handled." [^70] Reports rendered graphic tales of
severe snakebites, swollen limbs, and vomiting saints in the
matter-of-fact tone of spiritual utility: God allowed snake bites to
demonstrate God's control over the situation. [^71] Militaristic
metaphors of "battle" against Satan and "victory" over sin framed the
way the authors imagined their evangelistic efforts. [^72]

While most accounts concealed the sources of the snakes in the passive
voice---"there was a rattlesnake brought in"---some reports do indicate
that outsiders brought the snakes to challenge the congregations. [^73]
For his part, Tomlinson believed that these sorts of challenges and the
saints' willingness to meet them had "been a great factor in stopping
the mouths of gainsayers, and convincing unbelievers of the power of
God." [^74] In an account of one such confrontation, a group of skeptics
brought a "rattle snake pilot" to a meeting and challenged the saints to
handle it. [^75] In an act of marketing savvy, the group scheduled to
handle the snake the next day at two in the afternoon. Word of the event
spread and the "country was stirred for miles and a large crowd came."
[^76] The group preached for two hours on the "Signs of God," then four
members of the Church of God handled the snake. According to the
account, "The Lord allowed him [the snake] to bite two of the sisters.
This was to show the healing power of the Lord." [^77] Some accounts
claimed hundreds of witnesses to similar events and many indicated that
some observers converted after seeing snakes handled. [^78]

Even though these reports in *Evangel* suggest that only a tiny minority
of the Church of God ever handled snakes in their meetings, the
frequency of their publication (sometimes two or three accounts of
handling appeared in a single issue) indicates an interest on the parts
of both Tomlinson and his readers. The rhetorical consistency of the
reports suggests that their authors and many of the thousands of
subscribers to *Evangel* believed that the sign of handling not only
attested to the basic validity of their Spirit baptism experiences, but
that it was also an important aspect of their spiritual symbolic order.
The handling of dangerous snakes reinforced the Church of God's imagined
status as some of the most sanctified and blessed people on earth.
Tomlinson often made this claim. In one particularly pointed response to
a critic of the church's position on signs, Tomlinson chided, "I suppose
this gentleman is angry because God is so wonderfully blessing our
people and confirming the Word by so many signs. I suppose he [the
critic] is not able to do such things as we are doing, such as taking up
serpents, handling fire, casting out devils, and healing the sick, all
by the power of God." [^79] Failure to handle poisonous snakes or fire
was akin to the failure to manifest other signs such as speaking in
tongues. This failure suggested a real spiritual deficiency, while the
presence of serpent handling in the Church of God symbolized its
holiness.

As the 1910s drew to a close, Tomlinson and many others believed that
members of the Church of God could successfully manifest the most
dangerous signs in the symbolic hierarchy of Holy Spirit baptism. This
emphasis on dangerous signs coincided with a period of rapid expansion
of church membership. From 1914 to 1922 the Church of God more than
tripled in size to nearly 20,000 members and the circulation of
*Evangel* surged to 16,000 by 1916. [^80] Reports of Hensley's 1914
revival in regional newspapers had heightened the public's awareness of
the church and linked its growth to the handling of poisonous snakes.
The combined weight of church growth and frequent press coverage of
serpent handling points to a general willingness on the part of
Tomlinson and other Church of God leaders to adopt controversial signs
in order to gain symbolic leverage over their religious and secular
adversaries. Further, *Evangel*'s frequent coverage of handling
indicates that the practice was important to how the publication's
community of readers imagined their status as saints. Within this
imagined community, serpent handlers were not a distinct or separate
group of worshippers. Those who took up snakes were identified as
saints, brothers, and sisters. Each title testified to their acceptance
within the wider Church of God polity. The saints of the Church of God
distinguished themselves from members of other denominations who failed
to manifest the progressive expressions of Holy Spirit baptism
represented by *all* of the Markan signs, including serpent handling.

Before turning to non-Church of God responses to the practice, it is
worth reiterating that the practice of serpent handling did not
originate with Tomlinson and its continuation was not contingent on his
approval. The practice predated its appropriation by the Church of God,
emerging more or less simultaneously in Kansas, the Ozarks, the Sand
Mountain region of Alabama, and in Tennessee around the cities of
Chattanooga and Cleveland. Many of these incidents---recorded in local
newspapers, *Evangel*, and enshrined in popular memory---happened in
proximity to the early activities of the Church of God but were not
directed by it. The Church of God, under Tomlinson's leadership,
attempted to ride the whirlwind of serpent handling by providing a
retrospective legitimation for an independently emerging practice. The
church appropriated the practice to cultivate its members' sense of
distinctiveness and to attack its religious and secular adversaries.
Other denominations perceived this challenge and immediately condemned
the practice in their official publications even, as outlined in the
next section, some of their readers exhibited a sustained interest in
the validity of the sign and pushed back against their hierarchies'
rejections of the sign.

## II. Signs and Serpents in the Holiness-Pentecostal Press

In the early 1920s, Tomlinson lost control of the ecclesiastical
structure of the Church of God. A revolt in 1923 over fiscal issues and
ecclesiastical power forced Tomlinson from his position as General
Overseer of the church and led to the creation of two competing groups
both vying for the title of "Church of God." While Tomlinson continued
to advocate for serpent handling as a legitimate sign, he did so from
the weaker position as the Overseer of the much-diminished Church of God
of Prophecy. [^81] The departure of Tomlinson and his loyalists led to a
rapid reassessment of the sign of serpent handling within the body of
the Church of God (Cleveland). There had long been quiet rumblings of
discomfort regarding Tomlinson's support for the sign, and now the
remaining leaders moved to rethink and ultimately reject the practice.
In this process, the Church of God adopted a position that mirrored
other pentecostal denominations' rejection of willful or active snake
handling. As a result, snake handling developed into a distinct practice
of a small, ostracized minority at the edge of the Church of God's
polity. This repudiation of the practice led to the creation of a hard
boundary in the Church of God between the saints and a new class of
spiritual outlaws who persisted in the eccentric practice of snake
handling.

### Serpents as Signs

Despite Tomlinson's insistence that the Church of God was unique in its
embrace of serpent handling, material published by other early
pentecostal denominations indicates that he was hardly alone in
explicating the symbolic importance of "taking up serpents." Myriad
non-Church of God publications from the early 1900s attest to the
symbolic implications of the serpent for the growing pentecostal
movement. Many stories published during this period discussed the
serpent as a tempter that sowed discord among pentecostals. [^82] Other
stories were especially concerned with explaining the Christological
implications of Moses's brazen serpent and its relationship to Mark 16
as harbingers of Jesus's Great Commission. [^83] Had such symbolic
interpretations ended there, then one might rightly conclude that
Tomlinson's literal reading of the Markan signs was an idiosyncratic and
ephemeral project of the early Church of God. Yet, during the first
decade of the pentecostal revival, reports flowed into non-Church of God
newspapers and magazines recounting the miraculous manifestations of the
Holy Spirit as they related to the handling of poisonous snakes. Nowhere
was this clearer than in the network of publications associated with the
Assemblies of God.

From the 1910s to the early 1920s, the vast majority of these reports
were especially interested in Mark 16:18---"[t]hey shall take up
serpents; and if they drink any deadly thing, it shall not hurt them;
they shall lay hands on the sick, and they shall recover"---because of
its relationship to various missionary activities abroad. Many of the
early reports collected in the Chicago-based Stone Church's *The Latter
Rain Evangel* told of missionaries in India, China, and Africa. These
tales resounded with praise for God's protective power against poisonous
serpents in the missionary field. Led by William Hamner Piper, Stone
Church, as historian R. G. Robins has noted, "quickly emerged as a force
for missionary outreach and publication of the young [pentecostal]
movement. Its presses churned out volumes of tracts, books, and
pamphlets, along with *The Latter Rain Evangel*." [^84] Stone Church
hosted the second general meeting of the Assemblies of God in 1914 and
its publications had a major impact on the early theological development
of a host of pentecostal denominations. Within this context, the Stone
Church helped influence a generation of early pentecostals with reports
of missionaries threatened by snakes and poison. For example, one
representative report from 1913 linked Mark, serpents, and foreign
missions: "Our faith is quickened as we read of the remarkable
providences and deliverances in the lives of missionaries; how God
closed the mouth of the wild beast, took the poison from the serpent's
bite, and manifested Himself in innumerable ways as the Deliverer of
those who were faithful to His last commission." [^85] Thus, *The Latter
Rain Evangel* set an early precedent encouraging missionaries and
average readers alike to associate the Holy Spirit baptism with power
over poisonous snakes. [^86] This would have consequences for the
Assemblies of God as readers of its publications would connect
miraculous missionary work abroad with spiritual warfare in revivals at
home.

Beyond references to missionary work in exotic lands, some Assemblies of
God publications also contained accounts of worshippers at revival
meetings in the United States who were accidentally struck by snakes.
These testimonies are relevant because they highlight the similarities
and differences between the Assemblies of God's emerging understanding
of "taking up serpents" and the Church of God's alternative
interpretation of the practice. In the Assemblies of God, serpent bites
were more often than not directly associated with the healing power of
the Holy Spirit indicated in Mark 16: 17-18. [^87] For example, in a
notable case at a prayer meeting in Dayville, Oregon, a rattlesnake
struck Ralph C. Burnett who had recently received the gift of the Holy
Spirit. Immediately following the bite, "Brother and Sister Walter
Morris who lived nearby... anointed me with oil, and prayed for me
according to Mark 16:17, 18. The healing virtue of the Lord Jesus went
through my body like an electric current and I was instantly healed....
My companion, Brother Stockton, and I were singing, 'These Signs Shall
Follow Them That Believe,' when without any warning the rattler struck
me." [^88]

While Burnett sought healing through prayer and laying on of hands, at
least a few others prayed for the danger associated with snakebites in
order to witness for God's power. In a case similar to many recounted in
Tomlinson's *Church of God Evangel*, Alice Hannah of Prescott, Arkansas,
was accidentally struck by a snake. As her fellow churchgoers anointed
her with oil and prayed for healing, Hannah prayed her own prayer: "I
told the Lord to leave any sign He wanted, that others might know He
could heal the bite of a poisonous snake; so He let my foot swell. I was
bitten on Monday and never put my shoe on that foot for five days, yet
never failed to play the organ and help in every service." [^89] Her
prayer implied not only familiarity with Mark 16:18, but also a selfless
willingness to accept the risks of a severe snakebite. Similarly, Lucy
A. Luttrull of Bruner, Missouri, reported being bitten by a copperhead
while speaking in tongues. She refused medical treatment and allowed a
brother and sister to anoint her with oil and pray over her. [^90] As
with Hannah's prayer, Luttrull willfully accepted the risk associated
with the bite as a sign following from her belief. [^91]

The slipperiness between the incidental handling of dangerous serpents
and the willful courting of suffering to prove the sufferer's status as
one of "them that believe" seems to have necessitated a series of
statements from early leaders in the Assemblies of God. Unlike the
Church of God's theology that handling emerged as a progressive sign of
the power of the Holy Spirit, leaders in the Assemblies of God instead
emphasized that Mark 16:18 served as a general "promise of protection in
the face of every believer" who might encounter a deadly serpent. [^92]
Significantly, the Assemblies of God's unambiguous insistence that the
Markan signs promised *limited* protection against *accidental* contact
with serpents and poisons did not end questions from church members
regarding the sign of serpent handling. On no less than four occasions
between 1915 and 1922, E. N. Bell, the First General Chairmen of the
Assemblies of God, felt it necessary to respond directly to questions
about the practice of serpent handing in his regular columns. He
insisted on protection against the "incidental" handling of snakes but
rejected anything else as "tempting God." [^93] In the late 1910s and
early 1920s, Bell condemned serpent handling, but was less explicit in
condemning the handlers themselves. It is instructive to note that this
question arose repeatedly during the period when the Church of God
advocated for the sign throughout the South. Explicit condemnation of
serpent handlers as evil agents of Satan became more common in the 1920s
as the Church of God revised its position on handling serpents---a
revision that allowed other groups to condemn not only the practice, but
also its practitioners.

### "Beware the Church of God"

Even with the Church of God's initial support for Hensley's sign, there
were skeptics in the body of the church who fretted over serpent
handling's divine validity. Their concerns echoed the consensus emerging
in the publications associated with of the Assemblies of God. Long
before Tomlinson was forced to relinquish control over the Church of God
in 1923, two early dissenters raised concerns about the practice. First,
in 1914 shortly before Hensley held his Cleveland revival, J. B. Ellis,
an important minister of the church, offered a stern warning to
handlers: "I would like to say a few words to the saints who handle fire
and serpents. These things come under the head of miracles, and Paul
says 'All do not work miracles'.... Only the mercy of God has kept some
of them [saints who take up serpent] out of the grave. God has given
them several object lessons that ought to teach them there is a limit to
it." [^94] Ellis concluded that handling was a miracle, but he presented
it as an individualistic pursuit that did not strengthen the collective
body of the church. Instead of focusing on handling serpents, Ellis
urged members to use the signs of Spirit baptism in a "more excellent
way." If the saints would "command the lame to walk, the blind to see,
and the deaf to hear" then "they would use their gifts to profit
withal." [^95] Next, in a 1919 *Evangel* article M. S. Lemons authored a
convoluted report that suggested serpent handling is sometimes "A
Misappropriation of His [God's] Power." [^96] On one level, Lemons
argued that it is impossible for "weak men" to misappropriate the power
of the Holy Spirit "for illegal purposes," therefore implying that
handling serpents is legitimate. [^97] On another level, however, Lemons
worried that believers had "got the cart before the horse" and instead
of letting the signs follow from grace, believers were attempting to
"follow the signs" by taking up snakes. [^98] In such cases, he warned,
God "will let them [the snakes] take your life." [^99] He ultimately
concluded, "If this work is of man it will come to naught." [^100]

After Tomlinson's forced departure in 1923, critics of handling started
to condemn the practice. This condemnation emerged as the Church of
God's leaders sought cooperation rather than competition with other
pentecostal groups. The Church of God's need to distance itself from the
practice was partly a function of Tomlinson's early success at making
serpent handling a divisive issue in other pentecostal denominations.
Groups ranging from the Pentecostal Holiness Church to the Pentecostal
Mission to the Assemblies of God warned against the practice. Of these
groups, the first to offer a straightforward rejection appears to have
been the Pentecostal Holiness Church, which condemned snake handling in
1917. [^101] Anthropologist Steven M. Kane has argued that the
Pentecostal Holiness Church told its members to "Beware the Church of
God" because serpent handling was attracting converts to the Church of
God and interrupting Pentecostal Holiness Church meetings. [^102]

Unlike the Pentecostal Holiness Church, the Pentecostal Mission warned
against handling but, because of connections to the Church of God,
initially stopped short of condemning serpent handlers. Hattie M. Barth,
an early leader of the Atlanta-based organization, wrote in 1919 in the
*Bridegroom's Messenger*, "Two of these [signs of God's Word], which are
at present attracting much attention, are the handling of serpents and
the handling of fire. These displays of supernatural power attract
crowds to the services, and some are favorably impressed with these
things, while to others they are stumbling-blocks." [^103] After
carefully considering these signs, Barth concluded that handling
serpents is acceptable if it is accidental, as in the example of the
Apostle Paul being struck by a snake while collecting wood. [^104]
However, in the cases of willingly handling fire or poisonous snakes,
she dismissed such actions as "misdirected power." Echoing J. B. Ellis,
she concluded, "We understand that in these very assemblies where there
is handling of serpents and fire, the lame come away unhealed, the blind
eyes are not opened, nor the deaf ears unstopped." [^105]

While competition with the Church of God had prompted the Pentecostal
Holiness Church to condemn serpent handling, institutional connections
between the Pentecostal Mission and the Church of God forced Barth to
refine and clarify her position two months later. In a conciliatory
note, she responded to "several of the saints" who attacked her original
article on the subject. While she remained convinced of the danger of
these signs, she conceded that she had not witnessed them firsthand and
therefore did not "oppose the rightful use of these signs, but the abuse
of them." [^106] Ultimately, her response suggests that the real issue
was not the handling of serpents and fire *per se*, but rather the
notion that these signs might attest to some sort of spiritual
superiority on the part of handlers: "they [the handlers] also claim
greater power than other Pentecostal people because of this handling of
serpents and fire, although it does not seem, from what we can learn,
that they have greater power along other lines, such as healing the
sick." [^107] Barth's argument pushed back against Tomlinson's
insistence on the progressive spiritual superiority of the Church of
God. With this concern in mind, it is worth emphasizing that, in the
end, Barth referred to supporters of handling as "friends" and "saints."

Although Barth had to admit that she had not personally witnessed
handling, some in the Assemblies of God did have direct contact with the
practice. This is likely because of the overlapping territory of the
Assemblies with the Church of God. Initially organized in Hot Springs,
Arkansas, in 1914 as an umbrella organization combining more than one
hundred pentecostal congregations throughout the South and Midwest, the
Assemblies of God became one of the largest and most dynamic of the
early pentecostal denominations. As the memberships and geographic
boundaries of the Assemblies of God and the Church of God exploded in
the late 1910s, the two groups often found themselves in contact with
one another and competing for converts.

In September 1917, Jethro Walthall reported on his contact with the
Church of God. While proselytizing in rural Arkansas, Walthall reported
on a small congregation in Marysville:

> From thence we went to Marysville, Ark., where we found the little
> assembly confused, a number of young people having backslidden, and
> others discouraged. A man of the Church of God plea was in the
> community and had taken advantage of the conditions to install his
> second cleansing, snake handling theories. We allowed him liberty in
> the meetings until we saw he was determined to use every opportunity,
> in testimony and otherwise, to get his tenants before the people. When
> we saw that he would not work in harmony with the spirit of the
> meeting [...][w]e had to forbid him, who then went from us crying
> persecution. We never rallied over the confusion and hence the
> meetings were a failure, except that the Saints were helped and
> established. [^108]

Walthall's account illustrates three important facts related to serpent
handling in both churches. First, on a popular level, serpent handling
was nearly synonymous with the Church of God; Walthall, and likely many
others in the Assemblies of God, understood the two to be inseparable.
Second, when one considers Walthall's anecdotal evidence within the
contemporary context---which included the pushback against Barth's
condemnation of the practice, the institutional competition between
various pentecostal groups, members of the Assemblies of God courting
snake bites, numerous letters published in *Evangel* recounting the draw
of the practice in revival meetings, and a host of stories and letters
to the editor published in non-religious newspapers---it seems likely
that the practice was having an influence beyond the Church of God and
leading to conflict in some revival meetings and rural churches. The
Church of God representative in this account used his "theories" to
highjack a congregation that Walthall believed should be closer to the
Assemblies of God's interpretation of signs. Walthall deemed this novel
interpretation dangerous and believed it contributed to confusion within
the church. Third, even though he clearly rejected the practice of
handling, Walthall was reluctant to aggressively condemn the handler and
instead initially allowed the Church of God supporter "liberty" to speak
on the issue. As with Barth's hesitance to reject the handlers,
Walthall's account suggests that serpent handling retained enough of a
miraculous aura that outright condemnation might have alienated many in
his target audience. This hesitancy to condemn the handlers diminished
as the Church of God ceased to use serpent handling as cudgel to
bludgeon its opponents.

## Rank Fanaticism

Under the leadership of Flavius Josephus (F. J.) Lee (1875--1928), the
Church of God's second General Overseer, the church moved to undermine
its association with the practice of serpent handling. As historian
Mickey Crews has noted, Lee considered merging with the Assemblies of
God and as a result downplayed the practice. [^109] In 1928, at the
church's Twenty-Third General Assembly, leaders refused to make handling
a test for fellowship, although the assembly did not officially ban the
practice. [^110] Shortly before the Twenty-Third General Assembly's
clarification regarding handling, S. J. Heath published an article in
*Evangel* that indicated a clear transition in the church's collective
interpretation of the sign. He took exception with serpent handlers
because they were "using the Church of God as a medium to advertise
snake shows." [^111] This, wrote Heath, "is absurd and ridiculous"
because "many have gone into rank fanaticism, and false teaching,
bringing reproach on the Church [of God], and disgust to intelligent
people." [^112] The evocation of advertising alluded to the established
theme that the body is a signboard for various Godly or un-Godly
messages. If Ellis and Lemons had earlier paid lip service to the
legitimacy of the sign, Heath, in contrast, now openly condemned snake
handling. In the end, all three critics sought to change the entire
symbolic framework for understanding the sign by shifting it from the
religious to the secular realm. In this way, they read pride,
showmanship, and illegality written on the bodies of snake handlers.
This symbolic shift marked the beginning of the end of the practice's
association with the Church of God.

The new focus on pride and showmanship brought the Church of God in line
with other major denominations such as the Assemblies of God. If, as
outlined in the previous section, the Assemblies rejected the practice
in the 1910s but hesitated to condemn the handlers themselves, then by
the mid-1920s the body, perhaps freed by the Church of God's moderation
on the issue, had changed course. Ernest S. Williams---who would
eventually serve as the Fifth General Superintendent of the General
Council of the Assemblies of God---called the practice Satanic. "What
shall we think of those who for vain show would presume to take up
serpents, and otherwise tempt the Lord our God? Shall we consider them
superior in spirituality? Nay, but rather they are drawn away of Satan
being enticed to presume on gospel favors." [^113] By the end of the
decade, condemnation had given way to a general insistence that taking
up snakes or drinking poison are merely "passive signs" needing no
sophisticated interpretation. [^114] Those who insisted on such
interpretations were---consciously or unconsciously---agents of Satan.

As the 1920s closed, only a tiny handful of stories in the Church of
God's *Evangel* favorably mentioned revival activities including serpent
handling. By 1936 the few remaining positive references were replaced by
harsh condemnation. [^115] In 1939, E. L. Simmons, the editor and
publisher of *Evangel*, dismissed "modern 'snake handling'" as feeding
"upon a spirit of showmanship." [^116] His invocation of the category of
the "modern 'snake handling' movement" marked a culmination of two
decade's worth of rethinking of the sign of serpent handling on the part
of the Church of God's leadership. As *snake* replaced *serpent* in the
church's symbolic framework, the practice no longer possessed any
lingering spiritual aura and, consequently, demanded neither the respect
nor the support of the church. To handle a *snake* is to manipulate a
mere animal, not a *serpent*, humanity's great spiritual adversary.
Further, the suggestion that the *spirit* of snake handling is
showmanship displaces the Holy Spirit from the practice. Suddenly,
"modern 'snake handling'" was little more than a carnivalesque
aberration whose practitioners misappropriate Scripture for un-Christian
purposes.

## III. Serpent Handling in the Secular Press

The shift from *serpent* to *snake* within the Church of God not only
marked a transition toward denominational cooperation, but also
coincided with intensified secular media coverage of the practice.
Church leaders came to regard the once-perceived evangelistic benefits
of the practice as liabilities. As the Church of God withdrew support
for the practice, municipalities and states passed laws banning it.
Appalachian states began banning the handling of snakes in public venues
in the 1940s. Kentucky went first in 1940 by explicitly banning the use
of "any kind of reptile in connection with any religious service."
[^117] Most other Appalachian states followed (with the exception of
West Virginia), but none adopted Kentucky's broad approach. For example,
Georgia (1941) and North Carolina (1949) banned exposing people to
poisonous snakes and also made it illegal to encourage someone to handle
a poisonous snake---a prevision aimed at ministers who preached on the
subject.

These state laws had the combined effect of focusing the public's
attention on the specific act of picking up a snake in a public venue.
Nowhere was this focus on the act of displaying a snake in public
clearer than in the media frenzy surrounding the run up to and the
aftermath of Tennessee's ban of the practice in 1947. A series of
highly-publicized deaths and conflicts between serpent handlers and
police prompted the state to do something about the practice. [^118]
Tennessee determined, "It shall not be lawful for any person, or persons
to display, exhibit, handle or use any poisonous or dangerous snake or
reptile in such a manner as to endanger the life or health of any
person." [^119] The Tennessee law prompted the arrest of Hensley and
other handlers and led to a trial and national media coverage.

* * * * *

[Image 3][]

*George Went Hensley preaching near the Hamilton County Court House in
Chattanooga,Tennessee, in 1947. Photograph by J. B. Collins. Courtesy of
Archives of Appalachia, East Tennessee State University, J.B. Collins
Collection.*

Following Tennessee’s 1947 ban on serpent handling, officials in
Hamilton County arrested twelve members of the independent Dolley Pond
Church of God with Signs Following, including its head preacher Tom
Harden and Hensley. The case ended in convictions and \$50 fines for the
handlers, both of which the Tennessee State Supreme Court later upheld.\
The media spectacle turned Hensley and the other handlers regional
celebrities and aroused national interest in the “strange religious
cult” of the “snake handlers of Tennessee.”

* * * * *

In the years leading up to Tennessee's ban and the decade's worth of
coverage of the enforcement of the law, readers of regional newspapers,
national outlets such as *Newsweek*, the *New York Times*, the
*Washington Post*, *Time*, and any number of popular books learned of
snake handling in Appalachia. [^120] But this recognition of *snake
handling* was hardly spontaneous. Just as it took holiness-pentecostals
nearly three decades to reach the consensus that snake handling was a
distinct practice at odds with mainstream forms of pentecostal worship,
similarly it took decades for the secular press to identify snake
handling as something unique from holy roller religion. This process of
differentiation moved through three distinct but mutually reinforcing
phases. First, initial reports of the practice in the secular press
conflated snake handling with not only the Church of God but also holy
rollers more generally. Next, as reporting on the practice increased,
stories focused on the dangers of taking up snakes and sought to explain
the seemingly pathologically irrational behavior of handlers with
various psychological and sociological theories. It is in this era that
the secular press identified the distinct practice of snake handling.
Finally, by the late 1940s, reporting and editorials focused on the
criminalization of the unique practice identified during the previous
decade. The development of the pathologized and criminalized category of
snake handling paralleled the decline in usage of pejorative categories,
such as holy rollers, by the press and the growing normalization and
wider cultural acceptance of pentecostalism.

### From Holy Rollers and Cultists...

The earliest coverage of snake handling in the secular southern press
tended to focus on the absurdity of the practice by mocking the leaders
of the various revivals in which believers handled snakes. For example,
in a series of articles published in and around Chattanooga and
Cleveland documenting George Went Hensley's 1914 Tennessee revival,
reporters noted the dangerousness of the practice, but chose to use
handling as a vehicle for ridiculing holy rollers---that is,
pentecostals in general. [^121] In these early stories, reporters most
commonly referred to the handlers as holy rollers or members of the
Church of God. The reporters imposed the former title on the handlers,
while the handlers self-identified with the latter title. Even though
the Church of God despised the epithet holy roller, the conflation of
terms in the minds of the reporters and, eventually, their readers was
not accidental. [^122] One story reported that the Church of God office
in Cleveland actively promoted serpent handling as part of its public
outreach:

There are evidences that the leaders of the Holy Rollers in this
vicinity are conducting a thorough campaign to win strength of a
financial and material sort to their organization. In a little house in
the northern part of Cleveland one man, one woman and two girls are kept
busy setting type. Between takes they invite you to church, explaining
that, perhaps, as a special inducement, there'll be a rattlesnake to
give tone to the meeting. [^123]

No doubt the typesetters identified here played an important role in
publishing many of the accounts of serpent handling that appeared in
*Evangel* in the 1910s.

From the late 1920s to the early 1940s, most reports abandoned labels
such as holy rollers or Church of God to identify serpent handling
saints. [^124] The new titles that dominated the coverage during this
period included cult (or cultists), believers, religionists, and
fanatics. At the national level, the *New York Times* took particular
interest in the practice during the Depression, running no less than
fourteen articles on the subject between August 1934 and August 1940.
[^125] In these articles, *Times* reporters variously referred to
handlers as "Holiness," "'snake' preachers," and members of a "sect" or
"religious cult." [^126] The use of this wider range of terms indicated
a comparative trend in reporting that implied the practice's similarity
to other sectarian religious groups and its dissimilarity with
mainstream groups. [^127]

### ... To Snake Handlers

As reporters refined their categories of religious difference, holy
rollers and fanatics became snake handlers and serpent handlers. The
*Knoxville News Sentinel* appears to be the first publication to have
consistently used "snake handling" as both a hyphenated adjective and a
non-hyphenated noun. [^128] The *Sentinel* also ran a series of articles
that used "Serpent-handling" to describe the practice. Many of the
references in these articles place "serpent" in scare quotes, perhaps
indicating that this is how the handlers self-identified or in order to
highlight the implied religious distinction between snake and serpent.
[^129] The articles in this era frequently offered medical,
anthropological, and psychological explanations for the practice. [^130]
The near-synonymous uses of snake or serpent handling displaced older
usages as more and more reporters recognized that snake handlers were
worshipers with a difference. News accounts of snake handling services
slowly abandoned the association of snake handling and holy rollers and
the Church of God as various pentecostal groups became more well-known
and significant in American culture, although more generic terms such as
holiness and cultists uneasily persisted beside the newer designations
until the 1980s.

* * * * *

[Image 4][]

*Cover to J. B. Collins, Tennessee Snake Handlers (Chattanooga:
Chattanooga News-Free Press, 1947). Courtesy of Archives of Appalachia,
East Tennessee State University, J.B. Collins Collection.*

The 1947 arrest of Hensley, Harden, and ten other members of the Dolley
Pond Church of God with Signs Following tested Tennessee’s recent ban of
snake handling leading to significant local and national coverage of the
trial. Papers throughout Tennessee and the United States covered the
trial, with many wire sources relying on the images and stories produced
by J. B. Collins for the Chattanooga News-Free Press. Popular interest
in the trial helped propagate usage of the phrases *snake-handling*
(adjective), *snake handler*, and *snake handling* (nouns), although
Collins also used *cult* and *cultist* in his reporting.

This image is the cover to a 32-page booklet containing Collins’s
reporting on the history of the Dolley Pond church and an account of the
1947 trial. Drug stores and newstands in Chattanooga, Dayton, and
Cleveland sold the book. At the height of the trial, Collins autographed
a copy for Tom Harden, an event recorded in September 11, 1947, issue of
the News-Free Press. The book is unique for Collin’s access to the
church, the vivid photos of worship services, and an in-depth interview
with George Went Hensley. Collins’s interview with Hensley is one of
only a handful with the preacher who would die eight years later of
snakebite.

* * * * *

In the 1940s, the Church of God's position on snake handling converged
with these widely disseminated popular conceptions of the practice. In a
1940 *Evangel* article, Simmons, an elder in the church, washed his
hands of the whole issue and turned snake handling over to the state.
During a controversy over an independent Kentucky congregation of
handlers who called themselves the Pine Mountain Church of God, Simmons
rebuked the group for misappropriating the name of his church. [^131]
Further, Simmons wrote that snake handling was not a matter for the
Church of God to deal with, but rather belonged to the secular courts:

> It may seem at first that such a law [banning snake handling] is a
> violation of the Constitution but this is not true for the
> Constitution is founded upon the Bill of Rights and the Bill of Rights
> provides protection to all parties, so when people are displaying
> poisonous snakes in meetings they are not upholding the rights of all
> people. ... True Church of God people will not be disturbed nor
> carried away with any such fanatical display as these people \["snake"
> handlers\] put on for showmanship. [^132]

Rather than defend the sign, he argued that the serpent---the creature
that caused the "trouble" and the "first break made in the beautiful
order that God established"---had again caused a break and thrown the
body of the Church of God into confusion. As far as the church was
concerned, the handling of snakes was a dangerous expression of a
corrupt secular culture of showmanship and individuality that needed to
be regulated by state authorities, not by ecclesiastical discipline.

By the 1940s, the Church of God, along with many other pentecostal
groups, had completed a radical transition. Under Tomlinson's leadership
in the 1910s, the church traded the rugged Unicoi Mountains for the
small, but rapidly developing urban setting of Cleveland, Tennessee.
With this transition, the fundamental demographics of the church's
members and subsequent converts began to change. By the 1920s and 1930s,
the uneducated, poor white mountaineers who had once formed the bedrock
of the Church of God---and some of its most active serpent
handlers---gave way to a growing middle-class, urban-centered
constituency. F. L. Lee and his successors continued the transition
started by Tomlinson and eventually led the Church of God away from its
rural roots. "In the years following World War II," Crews observed, "the
Church of God completed its transformation from an obscure radical sect
to a church within the mainstream of conservative evangelicalism.... In
the postwar years, the Church of God's sectarianism mellowed. It
repudiated snake handling.... Pentecostal worship became less emotional
and less dependent on the supernatural." [^133] That such positions
would have been unthinkable during Tomlinson's overseership of the
Church of God---and perhaps even under Lee's---hardly bothered the
church's leadership from 1940 forward. The church's shift toward urban,
middle-class society and its cultivation of a less emotional form of
worship that downplayed supernatural experience paralleled the rise of a
new, upwardly mobile South. The moderate consensus forged between the
Church of God and other pentecostal bodies rejected the ritual excesses
of early pentecostal worship and led to support for the criminalization
of snake handling in order to draw a clear distinction between the
saints of the Church of God and the wild snake handlers of some
dangerous, irreligious movement.

## Conclusion

Historian of religion J. Z. Smith has argued that religions function as
"powerful engines for the production and maintenance of classificatory
systems." [^134] Seen in this light, the categories of *snake* and
*serpent* handling are the products of the process of classificatory
categorization that develops from what Smith has called the "metonymical
model" for constructing difference. Here, the other is "represented
metonymically in terms of the presence or absence of one or more
cultural trait." [^135] In this case, it is the presence of a specific
embodied act---picking up poisonous snakes during worship
services---that marked snake or serpent handlers as operating outside of
the normative categorical boundaries of mainstream pentecostalism. The
sign of handling serpents had been theologized and refined as a practice
within the ecclesiastical structure of the Church of God under the
leadership of Tomlinson to create a series of socio-symbolic differences
between his saints and members of churches unmoved by the Holy Spirit.
Within this process of differentiation, Tomlinson did not identify the
handling of serpents as the singular trait that distinguished the Church
of God from other groups. Instead, he interpreted handling---and other
actions such as drinking poison or handling fire---as part of a network
of other signs (including speaking in tongues, healing, and casting out
demons) that distinguished the Church of God from other groups.

When Tomlinson's influence on the Church of God (Cleveland) ended, his
successors joined the wider holiness-pentecostal consensus that viewed
serpent handling as one of the most problematic of the Markan signs.
Leaders in the post-Tomlinson Church of God eventually interpreted
handling as a distinct sign, a marker of absolute otherness that set the
saints of the Church of God at odds with handlers. As the Church of God
fell in line with the Assemblies of God, the Pentecostal Holiness
Church, and other major pentecostal groups, serpent handling emerged as
a distinguishing feature of a distinct form of worship over and against
which all other pentecostals might define themselves. Through a
metonymic process of othering, the Church of God located itself outside
the vast body of non-holiness and non-pentecostal denominations in the
South, yet inside a narrow range of practice that was neither dangerous
nor marked by showman-like excesses. As the church shifted its symbolic
framework for interpreting the practice, critics rejected its spiritual
significance (that is, *serpent* handling) in order to highlight its
secular symbolic essence (that is, showmen handling *snakes* to
entertain unlettered Christians and unchurched skeptics). Serpent
handling was relegated to independent pentecostal churches, many of
which descended from the Tomlinson-era Church of God, but no longer had
any organizational connection to it.

The Church of God's rejection of the practice coincided with growing
public awareness of snake handling because of intense local and national
media attention beginning in the 1930s. This coverage focused tightly on
the embodied practice of handling snakes in religious ceremonies. This
reductive presentation of the practice tended to efface how and why
Christians handled snakes. For instance, such coverage downplayed the
fact that outsiders frequently challenged people to handle snakes and
drink poison, or it ignored meetings in which snakes were not handled.
This reporting overdetermined the role of handling in such services. As
a result, the popular imaginary shared by many Americans represented
serpent handling as a bizarre, criminalized ritual, not as a practice
that developed in response to concrete theological and sociological
problems that troubled a generation of pentecostal leaders and
laypeople.

### Postscript

George Went Hensley died of a snakebite on Monday, July 25, 1955, in
Altha, Florida. During Sunday worship service, Hensley handled a
diamondback rattler for fifteen minutes. As he shoved the snake back
into a lard can, it struck. [^136] A sheriff investigating the church
attempted to take the aged minister to a hospital, but Hensley, true to
his faith, refused. He died in exquisite agony. The snake's hemorrhagic
venom destroyed his circulatory system and the cell walls of his
internal organs disintegrated. Hensley puked blood and thrashed about on
the living room floor of one of his followers. [^137] A judge overseeing
the case ruled the death a suicide "on the ground the preacher
voluntarily picked up the rattlesnake and refused medical assistance."
[^138] State officials throughout the South had banned the practice
while churches in the region regarded it as a lingering embarrassment
best either ignored or dismissed. Hensley's corpse serves as a metaphor
for the entire movement. Church and state, media and academe inscribe
competing narratives on the handlers. They are simultaneously saints and
suicides, cultists and criminals, preachers and performance artists.

[^1]: In preparing this essay, I had a lot of help. I'd like to
    acknowledge my advisors at the Ohio State University, Drs. Hugh B.
    Urban, Dan Reff, Eugene Holland, and Alan D. Beryerchen who provided
    feedback on various versions of this project over the years, as well
    as the anonymous reviewers at the *JSR*. I also must thank Drs.
    Ralph W. Hood Jr. and W. Paul Williamson for hosting me at several
    churches in Georgia, Tennessee, Alabama, and Kentucky. Finally, to
    the serpent handlers who welcomed me into their churches, a hearty
    thanks is also warranted.

[^2]: In the course of this essay, I shift back and forth between snake
    and serpent handling. My use of these terms is not arbitrary and
    they should not be read synonymously. For Christians who handle
    poisonous snakes in churches and revival meetings, the
    self-conscious use of the term serpent directly appeals to
    scriptural references to serpent. Because of their reliance on the
    King James Version of the Bible and its use of the word serpent in
    several key passages---especially Mark 16---handlers emphasize that
    they handle serpents, with all the symbolic and theological weight
    inherent in the term. For scholarly assessments of this symbolic
    manipulation of serpent, see Jim Birckhead, "Reading 'Snake
    Handling': Critical Reflections," in *Anthropology of Religion: A
    Handbook*, ed. Stephen D. Glazier (Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press,
    1997), 19--84; and Ralph W. Hood Jr., "When the Spirit Maims and
    Kills: Social Psychological Considerations of the History of Serpent
    Handling Sects and the Narrative of Handlers," *International
    Journal for the Psychology of Religion* 8.2 (1998): 71--96. Critics
    of the practice and secular audiences will often use the word
    *snake*. Some self-conscious critics use snake to undermine the
    scriptural nature of the practice, while others do so either because
    they do not appreciate the distinction or because they do not care
    about it. See Jim Birckhead, "'Bizarre Snake Handlers': Popular
    Media and a Southern Stereotype," in *Images of the South:
    Constructing a Regional Culture on Film and Video*, ed. Karl G.
    Heider (Athens: University of Georgia Press, 1993), 163--189. The
    present essay shifts between the two usages as context merits and
    signifies particularly important shifts in usage with italics. Out
    of respect for handlers, I use serpent whenever possible.

[^3]: Few texts have done more to popularize this view of serpent
    handling than Dennis Covington's *Salvation on Sand Mountain: Snake
    Handling and Redemption in Southern Appalachia* (Cambridge, Mass.:
    Da Capo Press, 2009). Covington's memoir of his time covering the
    trial of Glenn Summerford, a serpent handler who tried to kill his
    wife with his snakes, offers a vivid if somewhat dubious depiction
    of serpent handling in Appalachia. Thomas G. Burton, ed., *The
    Serpent and the Spirit: Glenn Summerford's Story* (Knoxville:
    University of Tennessee Press, 2004) retells the events through
    interviews and court documents, offering a useful supplement to
    Covington's memoir.

[^4]: For recent examples of news stories in national periodicals, see
    Julia Duin, "In West Virginia, Snake Handling Is Still Considered a
    Sign of Faith," *Washington Post*, November 10, 2011, accessed April
    8, 2013,
    <http://www.washingtonpost.com/lifestyle/magazine/in-wva-snake-handling-is-still-considered-a-sign-of-faith/2011/10/18/gIQAmiqL9M\\\_print.html>;
    Julia Duin, "Reviving Faith by 'Taking Up Serpents,'" *Wall Street
    Journal*, April 6, 2012, accessed April 8, 2013,
    <http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424052702303816504577309570173259662.html>;
    Julia Duin, "Serpent-handling Pastor Profiled Earlier in Washington
    Post Dies from Rattlesnake Bite," *Washington Post*, May 29, 2012,
    accessed April 8, 2013,
    <http://www.washingtonpost.com/lifestyle/style/serpent-handling-pastor-profiled-earlier-in-washington-post-dies-from-rattlesnake-bite/2012/05/29/gJQAJef5zU\\\_print.html>;
    and, Bob Smietana, "Young Snake Handlers Say They Grasp the Power of
    Faith," *USA Today*, June 3, 2012, accessed April 8, 2013,
    <http://www.usatoday.com/news/religion/story/2012-06-03/snake-handlers-pentecostal-tennessee/55354206/1>.
    Novels discussing the practice include Lee Smith, *Saving Grace*
    (New York: Ballantine Books, 1996); and Vincent Louis Carrella,
    *Serpent Box: A Novel* (New York: Harper Perennial, 2008). Notable
    television representations include *The X-Files*, Episode 148,
    "Signs & Wonders," FOX, January 23, 2000, written by Jeffrey Bell;
    *City Confidential*, Episode 023, "Scottsboro: Foul Play In The
    Bible Belt," A&E, originally aired February 21, 2000; *Snake Man of
    Appalachia*, Animal Planet, first broadcast January, 1 2012; and,
    most recently, *Justified*, Episodes 40--52, FX, season 4, January
    8--April 2, 2013.

[^5]: See, respectively, Weston La Barre, *They Shall Take Up Serpents:
    Psychology of the Southern Snake-Handling Cult* (Minneapolis:
    University of Minnesota Press, 1962); Kenneth Paul Ambrose, "A
    Serpent-Handling Church in a Midwestern City: A Study of Commitment"
    (PhD diss., Ohio State University, 1978); and Ralph W. Hood Jr. and
    David L. Kimbrough, "Serpent-Handling Holiness Sects: Theoretical
    Considerations," *Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion* 34.3
    (1995): 311--322.

[^6]: Folklorists and ethnographers have done some of the best work in
    the humanities on serpent handling. Excellent works include Mary Lee
    Daugherty, "Serpent-Handling as Sacrament," *Theology Today* 33.3
    (1976): 232--243; Thomas G. Burton, Serpent-Handling Believers
    (Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press, 1993); Birckhead,
    "Reading 'Snake Handling'"; Robert A. Orsi, "Snakes Alive:
    Resituating the Moral in the Study of Religion," in *Women, Gender,
    Religion: A Reader*, ed. Elizabeth A. Castelli and Rosamond C.
    Rodman (New York: Palgrave, 2001), 98--118; David L. Kimbrough,
    *Taking Up Serpents: Snake Handlers of Eastern Kentucky* (Macon,
    Ga.: Mercer University Press, 2002); and Jim Birckhead, "'There's
    Power in the Blood:' Writing Serpent Handling as Everyday Life," in
    *Personal Knowledge and Beyond: Reshaping the Ethnography of
    Religion*, ed. James V. Spickard, J. Shawn Landres, and Meredith B.
    McGuire (New York: New York University Press, 2002), 134--145.
    Interestingly, most of this material (with the exception of Burton's
    and Kimbrough's important historical work) focuses on interpreting
    the significance of serpent handling for its practitioners or using
    it to illustrate academic disputes. Much of this work shows little
    concern for the historical development of the practice. Social
    scientists have been most active in piecing together the historical
    development and diffusion of handling. Anthropologist Steven M. Kane
    and psychologists Ralph W. Hood Jr. and W. Paul Williamson pioneered
    most of the historical research. For Kane's earliest work, see
    "Aspects of Holy Ghost Religion: The Snake-Handling Sect of the
    American Southeast" (MA thesis, University of North Carolina at
    Chapel Hill, 1973); and, "Snake Handlers of Southern Appalachia"
    (PhD diss., Princeton University, 1979). For the most recent
    synthesis of Hood and Williamson's research, see *Them That Believe:
    The Power and Meaning of the Christian Serpent-Handling Tradition*
    (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2008).

[^7]: Deborah Vansau McCauley, *Appalachian Mountain Religion: A
    History* (Champaign: University of Illinois Press, 1995); and,
    Randall J. Stephens, *The Fire Spreads: Holiness and Pentecostalism
    in the American South* (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press,
    2008).

[^8]: Hood and Williamson have studied the ways in which serpent
    handling destabilized the Church of God, but their research has
    largely intervened within the disciplines of psychology and
    sociology, where they focus their attention on problematizing
    theories related to the transition from small-scale sects to
    organized, hierarchical denominations. Within this framework, Hood
    and Williamson recovered serpent handling's place in the early
    Church of God and tabulated the frequency of its citations in the
    church's early publications, such as *The Church of God Evangel*.
    Thus, they established the church's initial embrace of serpent
    handling, recorded the data indicating the rise and fall of the
    practice, and explained the subsequent rejection of the handling.
    Their quantitative research largely sidesteps a close analysis of
    the content of these early reports, instead emphasizing a
    quantitative project to mine the accounts for relevant factual
    information regarding the who, what, when, and where contained in
    the articles. Their rich bibliography of material on serpent
    handling in the *Evangel* comprises the core primary sources that I
    rely on in this essay. Hood and Williamson have blazed a trail that
    anyone interested in some of the oldest printed primary sources on
    serpent handling must follow. See W. Paul Williamson and Ralph W.
    Hood, Jr., "Differential Maintenance and Growth of Religious
    Organizations Based Upon High-Cost Behaviors: Serpent Handling
    Within the Church Of God," *Review of Religious Research* 46.2
    (2004): 150--168; and Hood and Williamson, *Them That Believe*. Also
    essential is W. Paul Williamson, "Index of Serpent-Handling Articles
    found in the Church of God Evangel," available in the
    Hood-Williamson Research Archives for the Holiness Serpent Handling
    Sects, Lupton Library, University of Tennessee, Chattanooga.

[^9]: The full text of Mark 16:15--18 (KJV) reads: "Go ye into all the
    world, and preach the gospel to every creature. He that believeth
    and is baptized shall be saved; but he that believeth not shall be
    damned. And these signs shall follow them that believe; In my name
    shall they cast out devils; they shall speak with new tongues; They
    shall take up serpents; and if they drink any deadly thing, it shall
    not hurt them; they shall lay hands on the sick, and they shall
    recover."

[^10]: For example, geographer and folklorist John B. Rehder situated
    snake handling within a network of religious and cultural practices
    unique to the Appalachians. Specifically, he argued that strident
    textual literalism, revival practices, and a geographically specific
    "folk culture of self-medication" converged into the serpent
    handling traditions of the South. John B. Rehder, *Appalachian
    Folkways* (Baltimore: John Hopkins University Press, 2004),
    230--240; 244.

[^11]: In contrast to the dismissive tone of these earlier works, more
    recent important studies by Grant Wacker and Harvey Cox on the
    American (and global) pentecostal movement largely ignore the
    practice. Grant Wacker, *Heaven Below: Early Pentecostals and
    American Culture* (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2001)
    dedicated a single sentence to snake handling (74). In an article
    published two decades earlier Wacker did situate snake handling
    within the context of the "conceptual ahistoricism" prevalent among
    fundamentalists and other popular theologically conservative
    movements of the early 1900s. Grant Wacker, "The Functions of Faith
    in Primitive Pentecostalism," *The Harvard Theological Review*
    77.3--4 (1984): 353--375. Harvey Cox, *Fire from Heaven: The Rise of
    Pentecostal Spirituality and the Reshaping of Religion in the
    Twenty-First Century* (Cambridge, Mass.: Da Capo Press, 2001) does
    not mention serpent handling.

[^12]: Vinson Synan, *The Holiness-Pentecostal Movement in the United
    States*, 1st ed. (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1971), 185--186. Vinson
    Synan, *The Holiness-Pentecostal Tradition: Charismatic Movements in
    the Twentieth Century*, 2nd ed. (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Eerdmans,
    1997) slightly augmented the discussion from the first edition by
    adding updated sources, but the basic presentation of serpent
    handling remained unchanged.

[^13]: Synan, *The Holiness-Pentecostal Movement*, 186.

[^14]: Robert Mapes Anderson, *Vision of the Disinherited: The Making of
    American Pentecostalism* (New York: Oxford University Press, 1979),
    92. The assertion that handling was limited to the rural fringe of
    Appalachia has not withstood historical scrutiny. A review of
    primary sources reveals that handling spread rapidly throughout the
    South and was common in small towns and cities. Indeed, it was
    handling in the city limits of Chattanooga that led to some of the
    most notable conflicts with handlers and public officials. Mickey
    Crews, *The Church of God: A Social History* (Knoxville: University
    of Tennessee Press, 1990), and Hood and Williamson, *Them That
    Believe*, have documented the spread of the practice to urban areas.
    Further, as I document later in this essay, the practice originally
    developed outside of the South and emerged, rhizomatically, in urban
    spaces such as Hutchinson, Kansas, and rural areas in the Ozarks and
    southern Appalachia.

[^15]: Anderson, *Vision of the Disinherited*, 93.

[^16]: McCauley, *Appalachian Mountain Religion*, 18.

[^17]: Stephens, *The Fire Spreads*, 254.

[^18]: As has been well documented by cultural historians, following the
    Civil War, northern magazines and newspapers "discovered" Appalachia
    and began to imagine this vast swath of the North American landmass
    as a manifestation of geographic and cultural otherness. Northern
    writers generally conceived of southern highlanders as "static,"
    "Yesterday's people," members of the "other America," residents of a
    land "where time stood still," and as "Our Contemporary Ancestors"
    with Mountaineers likened to the sturdy but backward highlanders of
    sixteenth-century Scotland. See Henry D. Shapiro, *Appalachia on Our
    Mind: The Southern Mountains and Mountaineers in the American
    Consciousness, 1870--1920* (Chapel Hill: University of North
    Carolina Press, 1978); Robert D. Eller, "Industrialization and
    Social Change in Appalachia, 1880--1930: A Look at the Static
    Image," in *Colonialism in Modern America: The Appalachian Case*,
    ed. Helen Matthews Lewis, Linda Johnson, and Donald Askins (Boone,
    N.C.: Appalachian Consortium Press, 1978), 37; and John Alexander
    Williams, *Appalachia: A History* (Chapel Hill: University of North
    Carolina Press, 2002), 201.

    While these popular imaginings have been challenged by generations
    of historians and by Appalachians themselves, the mythically
    isolated "foothills" and "hollers" of the region remain a hard trope
    for scholars to abandon. The irony of "isolated" Appalachia, of
    course, is that it was the very processes of
    modernization---especially industrialization and specialized forms
    of knowledge production---that allowed generations of
    non-Appalachians to imagine the region in this way. In the early
    1900s even some of the most prolific and productive authors of
    Appalachian otherness had come to recognize that their project was
    simultaneously the product of and producer of the penetration of the
    region by modernizing forces. For example, in *Christian
    Reconstruction in the South* (Boston: Pilgrim Press, 1909), H. Paul
    Douglass wrote:

    > I have sometimes taken friends, representatives of completer
    > civilizations, on hunting or fishing trips through this back
    > country and have afterward been chagrined at the accounts of it
    > they have written for Eastern papers.... They described it as
    > picturesquely primitive as they saw it, but forgot to record the
    > commonplace---that there were also electric lights, colleges,
    > wealth, and an extremely self-conscious life which thought itself
    > as good as any in America (303).

    Douglass perceived Appalachia as primitive and thought its residents
    needed the benefits of modernity, but he also recognized that these
    forces had already touched it and that the Easterners' knowledge of
    the region was predicated on this previous exposure to the forces of
    progress.

[^19]: *The Church of God Evangel* was published by the Church of God
    under several titles in Cleveland, Tennessee, from 1910 to 1950.
    This essay cites Evangel issues from the early 1910s until the late
    1940s. The Stone Church's *The Latter Rain Evangel* appeared from
    1908--1939, and citations in this essay cover 1911--1929. Finally,
    the Assemblies of God's *The Pentecostal Evangel* ran from
    1908--2002. This essay cites material referencing serpent handling
    published between 1919 and 1958.

[^20]: Hood and Williamson, *Them That Believe*, 68.

[^21]: Charles F. Parham, "The Latter Rain: The Story of the Original
    Apostolic or Pentecostal Movements," in *The Life of Charles F.
    Parham, Founder of the Apostolic Faith Movement*, ed. Sarah E.
    Parham (1930; New York: Garland, 1985), 51--52.

[^22]: Ibid.

[^23]: Vinson Synan, "The Pentecostal Century: An Overview," in *The
    Century of the Holy Spirit: 100 Years of Pentecostal and Charismatic
    Renewal, 1901--2001*, ed. Vinson Synan (Nashville: Thomas Nelson,
    2001), 4.

[^24]: "Weird Babel of Tongues," *Los Angeles Times*, April 18, 1906, 1;
    and, Parham, "The Latter Rain," 53.

[^25]: Michel de Certeau, *The Practice of Everyday Life*, trans. Steven
    Rendall, 2nd ed. (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1988),
    xxi.

[^26]: John C. Thomas and Kimberly Ervin Alexander, "'And the Signs Are
    Following': Mark 16:9--20: A Journey into Pentecostal Hermeneutics,"
    *Journal of Pentecostal Theology* 11.2 (2003): 150.

[^27]: Ibid., 152. As a number of religion scholars have pointed out,
    sociologist Pierre Bourdieu's concept of embodied "cultural capital"
    is instructive for understanding how "dispositions of the mind and
    body"---such as the embodied Markan "signs" of pentecostal
    experience---are convertible into institutional and social power.
    See Pierre Bourdieu, "The Forms of Capital," in *Education: Culture,
    Economy, and Society*, ed. A. H. Halsey (New York: Oxford University
    Press, 1997), 47. For useful explorations of Bourdieu in religious
    studies, see Hugh B. Urban, "Sacred Capital: Pierre Bourdieu and the
    Study of Religion," *Method & Theory in the Study of Religion* 15.4
    (2003): 354--389; Terry Rey, *Bourdieu on Religion: Imposing Faith
    and Legitimacy* (Oakville, Conn.: Equinox, 2007); and Sean McCloud,
    *Divine Hierarchies: Class in American Religion and Religious
    Studies* (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2007).
    Within the system of pentecostal signs, the circulation of the
    manifestations of the Holy Spirit represents "cultural capital in
    the embodied state... [and] presupposes a process of embodiment....
    The work of acquisition is work on oneself (self-improvement), an
    effort that presupposes a personal cost..., an investment, above all
    of time, but also of that socially constituted form of libido,...
    with all the privation, renunciation, and sacrifice that it may
    entail" (Bourdieu, "The Forms of Capital," 48). Thus, religion
    scholar Lynne Gerber uses Bourdieu's ideas to argue that the body is
    "a critical site for the cultivation of cultural capital,"
    especially among those seeking to consolidate material and
    institutional resources. See Lynne Gerber, "Fat Christians and Fit
    Elites: Negotiating Class and Status in Evangelical Christian
    Weight-Loss Culture," *American Quarterly* 64.1 (2012): 69.

    Following these analytical insights, Tomlinson attempted to exploit
    the cultivation of embodied cultural capital---especially in the
    most risky practices such as serpent handling---to help create,
    maintain, and reorder barriers between holiness-pentecostal groups
    and within them.

[^28]: R. G. Robins, *A. J. Tomlinson: Plainfolk Modernist* (New York:
    Oxford University Press, 2004), 184; and Charles W. Conn, *Like a
    Mighty Army: A History of the Church of God, 1886--1995* (Cleveland,
    Tenn.: Pathway Press, 1996), 3--9.

[^29]: A. J. Tomlinson, *The Last Great Conflict* (Cleveland, Tenn.:
    White Wing Publishing, 1984), 107.

[^30]: Ibid., 232.

[^31]: In 1907 the approximately 60 members of the Tomlinson-led
    Holiness Church officially agreed to change the church's name to the
    Church of God. Members believed that Holiness pointed to the
    doctrine of the church rather than a proper, scripturally sanctioned
    name. After combing the New Testament for such a name, the church
    settled on the "Church of God" referred to in Paul's letters to the
    Corinthians (1 Cor. 1:2, and 2 Cor. 1:1). See Conn, *Like a Mighty
    Army*, 86--88. The mountain communities are from Crews, *The Church
    Of God*, 5.

[^32]: Crews, *The Church Of God*, 5.

[^33]: Of all the lacunae in scholarship on serpent handling, the
    "whiteness" of the handlers is perhaps the most under-explored. That
    serpent handling is nearly unheard of in black holiness-pentecostal
    congregations is an interesting fact deserving far more attention
    than it has garnered. Given the mutually reinforcing practices and
    theologies in many white and black congregations in the Appalachian
    South, the lack of handling among African-American groups is
    conspicuous on one level, and on another not so surprising given
    some of the distinctions in their respective folk cultures.
    Regardless, most of the scholarship on handling has not been
    comparative and therefore has missed the interesting ways in which
    poor whites in Appalachia have become a negative reference group in
    so many forms of scholarship and popular culture. From the general
    tendency in social science literature to pathologize the religion of
    poor whites, to recent popular attempts to elevate snake handlers to
    the level of Appalachian folk heroes, the racialized components of
    handling remain largely understudied, undertheorized, and
    unproblematized.

[^34]: Ann Taves, *Fits, Trances, and Visions: Experiencing Religion and
    Explaining Experience from Wesley to James* (Princeton: Princeton
    University Press, 1999), 330.

[^35]: Ibid., 332. Some of the earliest sources from the Azusa Street
    Revival claimed that all of the signs followed believers at the
    revival. For example, a note in the *Apostolic Faith* did not
    explicitly claim that snakes were handled, but insisted, "All the
    signs in Mark 16:16-18 have followed except the raising of the dead"
    ("Signs Follow," *The Apostolic Faith*, November 1906, 4, in
    Consortium of Pentecostal Archives (hereafter cited as CPA),
    accessed June 28, 2013, 
    [PDF](http://pentecostalarchives.org/digitalPublications/USA/Independent/Apostolic%20Faith%20%28Azusa%20Street%29/Unregistered/1906/FPHC/1906\\\_11.pdf).
    See also, Thomas and Alexander, "'And the Signs Are Following,'"
    150--151.

[^36]: A. J. Tomlinson, *The Signs That Follow* (Cleveland, Tenn.: White
    Wing Publishing House, 1948), 7.

[^37]: W. W. Harmon, "Signboards," *Church of God Evangel*, February 25,
    1928, 3.

[^38]: Ibid., 1.

[^39]: Ibid., 3.

[^40]: Randall J. Stephens, "'There Is Magic in Print:' The
    Holiness-Pentecostal Press and the Origins of Southern
    Pentecostalism, Part 1," *Journal of Southern Religion* 5 (2002):
    <http://jsr.fsu.edu/2002/Stephens.htm>; and Randall J. Stephens,
    "'There Is Magic in Print:' The Holiness-Pentecostal Press and the
    Origins of Southern Pentecostalism, Part 2," *The Journal of
    Southern Religion* 5 (2002): <http://jsr.fsu.edu/2002/Stephens.htm>;
    Stephens, *The Fire Spreads*.

[^41]: Stephens, "'There Is Magic in Print,' Part 1," note 15.

[^42]: Stephens, "'There Is Magic in Print:' Part 2."

[^43]: *The Evening Light and Church of God Evangel* began as a monthly
    publication in March 1910. In 1911 the title was shortened to *The
    Church of God Evangel*. By 1912, it claimed 2,135 subscribers and
    the church built its first publishing house in 1913 to accommodate
    the growing enterprise. At the end of the decade *Evangel* had a
    print run of 16,500, nearly 16,000 subscribers, a full-time
    editorial staff of fifteen, and a constantly growing office complex.
    C. T. Davidson, *Upon This Rock*, 3 vols. (Cleveland, Tenn.: White
    Wing Publishing House and Press, 1973), 1:375, 383, 397, 418, 434,
    502, 512.

[^44]: "Bro. George Hensley," *Church of God Evangel*, September 12,
    1914, 6. This reference to serpent handling is not the earliest in
    the Evangel. There are at least three earlier notes, but these did
    not mention specific handlers or events. First, James Benton Ellis,
    "Oneonta, AL," *Church of God Evangel*, May 9, 1914, 8, offered a
    stern warning to handlers (discussed in a following subsection). A
    second simply noted, "Bro. W. F. Bryant preached to a congregation
    at Banker Hill, Tenn. Sunday. It had been rumored that a snake was
    going to be handled. Jesus said, 'An evil and adulterous generation
    seekth after a sign, and no sign shall be given &c" ("Bro. W. F.
    Bryant Preached," Church of God Evangel, September 5, 1914, 3). The
    cryptic scriptural reference seems to suggest either a) no snake was
    brought, or b) the author did not support the manifestation of such
    a sign. Finally, the earliest reference in the *Evangel* is a list
    the signs of Spirit baptism and it includes handling ("The Church of
    God: Teaching," *Church of God Evangel*, August 15, 1910, 3).

[^45]: The earliest stories mentioning Hensley's association with the
    practice appeared in papers published in and around Chattanooga,
    Tennessee, in 1914: "'Holy Rollers' Handle Snakes with Impunity,"
    *Chattanooga News*, September 10, 1914, 12; "He Can Handle Snakes
    but Will He Walk the River?" *Chattanooga Daily News*, September 24,
    1914, 3; and, "Holy Rollers Anoint One of Their Patients,"
    *Chattanooga Times*, September 27, 1914, 2.

[^46]: In 1915 Hensley was recommended for ministry in the Church of God
    and received an "Evangelist Certificate" (Burton, *Serpent-Handling
    Believers*, 153). Hensley passed the Church of God's official
    evangelist examination on September 10, 1917 ("Examination
    Certificate," September 10, 1917, Hensley, George Went folder, Hal
    Bernard Dixon Jr. Pentecostal Research Center, Cleveland, Tennessee
    [hereafter cited as the HBD]). In 1919 Hensley renewed his 1915
    Evangelist Certificate ("Evangelist Certificate," February 6, 1919,
    Hensley, George Went folder, HBD). By 1922 or 1923 Hensley
    officially left the church citing "much trouble at home" in the
    official church records ("Revocation of Ministry," Hensley, George
    Went folder, HBD; see also Kimbrough, *Taking Up Serpents*, 46--47,
    for details of Hensley's decision to leave the church). His
    withdrawal from an official position did not end Hensley's
    commitment to serpent handling or the Church of God's relationship
    to the practice. In the years before his death of a snakebite in
    1955 Hensley traveled throughout the South as an independent
    preacher spreading the practice.

[^47]: Jimmy Morrow, *Handling Serpents: Pastor Jimmy Morrow's Narrative
    History of His Appalachian Jesus' Name Tradition*, ed. Ralph W. Hood
    Jr. (Macon, Ga.: Mercer University Press, 2005) suggested that there
    was a long-established folk tradition of handling snakes that
    predated Hensley taking up snakes by more than a decade. Other
    anecdotal stories from serpent handlers similarly suggest the
    practice has origins independent of Hensley. Kimbrough, *Taking up
    Serpents*, 49--50, argued that other preachers took up snakes
    without knowing of Hensley, a fact that suggests that the focus on
    "signs" in the early pentecostal movement made taking up serpents an
    important problem for many literal-minded believers.

[^48]: That is, the earliest reference this author has uncovered.

[^49]: "Worshipers Are Bitten," *Cleveland Plain Dealer*, June 18, 1909,
    in America's Historical Newspapers database (hereafter cited as
    AHN); "Serpents in Their Religion," *The Kansas City Times*, June
    22, 1909, AHN; "Snake Worshipers Are Found in Kansas," *Kalamazoo
    Gazette*, June 25, 1909, AHN; "Snake Worshippers," *Fort Worth
    Star-Telegram*, June 27, 1909 AHN; "Queer Sect Not Afraid Of
    Snakes," Trenton Evening Times, August 25, 1909, AHN; "Queer Sect
    Immune from Snake Poison," *Fort Worth Star-Telegram*, August 27,
    1909, AHN.

[^50]: The stories wrongly identified the biblical source as Luke 6, but
    quoted Mark 16 in their reports.

[^51]: "Child Plays with Snake Without Being Harmed," *The Columbus
    Ledger*, September 4, 1913, AHN.

[^52]: "Snake Bites Test of Faith by Sect Act of Alabama Preacher,"
    *Fort Worth Star-Telegram*, October 17, 1913, AHN; "Was He Snake
    Bite Proof? No," Aberdeen Daily American, November 4, 1913, AHN.
    But, as noted above, the 1909 accounts strongly imply a death among
    the True Followers of Jesus of Christ in Kansas. Given the spotty
    reporting and regional nature of the practice during the 1900s and
    1910s, it's quite likely that the number of deaths associated with
    handling during this period were underreported.

[^53]: The present essay, because of its focus on serpent handling in
    South and the practice's relationship to the development of
    pentecostalism, cannot deal with these earliest accounts in any
    depth. In fact, it would take an entire article---or perhaps
    more---to sort out this earlier pre-Hensley history of serpent
    handling. For the purposes of this essay, I follow the conventional
    trend of depicting Hensley as the source of the practice. This is
    simply a matter of narrative convenience. As more archival material
    becomes available in searchable databases, such a America's
    Historical Newspapers, it seems likely that researchers will uncover
    that many expressions of serpent handling emerged spontaneously and
    independently of one another as preachers speculated on the
    significance of Mark 16:17--18 during the late nineteenth and early
    twentieth centuries. Hensley is associated with the origination of
    the practice for two reasons. First, the intense religious and
    secular press coverage of his revival in Cleveland in 1914 assured
    that he would be remembered as a charismatic and dynamic leader.
    Second, the Church of God, via A. J. Tomlinson and his sons Homer
    and Milton, desired to claim that the practice emerged out of the
    teachings of their church and its unique spiritual manifestations.
    This led to multiple publications attesting to the practice's
    relationship to Hensley and the Church of God. For example, Homer
    Tomlinson argued that he was personally responsible for converting
    Hensley and this conversion led directly to the practice's origin.
    Homer also lavished praise on serpent handling. See Homer A.
    Tomlinson, *"It Came to Pass in Those Days:" The Shout of a King*
    (New York: The Church of God, 1968), 35--44. Similarly, Milton A.
    Tomlinson, who followed his father as the Second Overseer of the
    Church of God of Prophecy, kept his father's writings on serpent
    handling in print until the late 1940s by distributing a short tract
    on the subject. See Tomlinson, *The Signs That Follow*.

[^54]: Burton, Serpent-Handling Believers, 41.

[^55]: Anton T. Boisen, "Economic Distress and Religious Experience: A
    Study of Holy Rollers," *Psychiatry* 2 (1939): 185--194; John B.
    Holt, "Holiness Religion: Cultural Shock and Social Reorganization,"
    *American Sociological Review* 5.5 (1940): 740--747; and, Kimbrough,
    *Taking Up Serpents*, 73--116.

[^56]: A. J. Tomlinson, "Sensational Demonstrations," *Church of God
    Evangel*, September 19, 1914, 1.

[^57]: Ibid., 2.

[^58]: Ibid.

[^59]: Ibid., 3.

[^60]: Ibid.

[^61]: Ibid., 1.

[^62]: Ibid., 2.

[^63]: Ibid.

[^64]: *General Assembly Minutes*, 1906--1914 (Cleveland, Tenn.: White
    Wing Publishing House, 1992), 15.

[^65]: A. J. Tomlinson, "Walk Softly Before God," *Church of God
    Evangel*, January 9, 1915, 1.

[^66]: *Book of Minutes: A Compiled History of the Work of the General
    Assemblies of the Church of God* (Cleveland, Tenn.: Church of God
    Publishing House, 1922), 268, quoted in Burton, *Serpent-Handling
    Believers*, 72. This statement concludes with Tomlinson noting that
    serpent handling should be practiced, but never as a test for
    salvation or the holiness of the believer.

[^67]: This number is drawn from Williamson, "Index of Serpent-Handling
    Articles Found in the Church of God Evangel." The vast majority of
    Evangel reports related to serpent handling appeared between late
    spring and early autumn, with the heaviest concentration of reports
    recounting meetings and revivals taking place in July, August, and
    September. Accounts in the secular press of handling in revivals and
    church meetings indicate a similar pattern with August and September
    being the months of the most intense handling activity. No doubt
    this is because late summer is generally a period of outdoor
    revivals and tent services in the South. It is also typically a time
    of homecomings and reunions for some churches and kin groups.
    Nonetheless, it is interesting to note the cyclical, seasonal nature
    of reporting on handling, a pattern that has remained remarkably
    stable for nearly a century.

[^68]: Hood and Williamson, *Them That Believe*, 64--65.

[^69]: T. F. McGuire, "Summerville, Ga.," *Church of God Evangel*, June
    5, 1915, 3.

[^70]: J. H. Lord, "Knoxville, Tenn.," *Church of God Evangel*,
    September 8, 1917, 4.

[^71]: On swollen limbs, see J. L. Scott, "Ridgedale, Tenn.," Church of
    God Evangel, August 26, 1916; Florence Long, "Sale Creek, Tenn.,"
    *Church of God Evangel*, August 21, 1915, 3. For vomiting saints,
    see Henry Kinsey, "Report," *Church of God Evangel*, August 5, 1916,
    3. As another report explained, "One night a copperhead snake was
    brought in and handled by about seven of the saints. It placed its
    fangs into the hand of one of the brethren just to show that he was
    fighting stock. The hand swelled slightly, but the Lord healed him
    without leaving a scar or the least sign" (C. C. Martin,
    "Hayesville, N.C.," *Church of God Evangel*, September 22, 1917, 2).

[^72]: J. Cagle, "Ooltewah, Tenn.," *Church of God Evangel*, August 21,
    1915, 4; J. Aylor, "Report," *Church of God Evangel*, October 14,
    1916, 3; and, G. T. Brouayer, "Report from Ladonia, Texas," *Church
    of God Evangel*, June 23, 1917, 4.

[^73]: Passive constructions such as O. T. Morgan, "Walhalla, S.C.,"
    *Church of God Evangel*, September 22, 1917, 4, make it difficult to
    sort out if members of the church frequently brought their own
    snakes, as is now the norm in most serpent handling churches, or if
    challengers and skeptics brought snakes to challenge members of the
    church. Some sources indicate outsiders brought the majority of the
    snakes. See, G. T. Stragel, W. A. Capshaw, and Daughter, "Report,"
    *Church of God Evangel*, July 22, 1916, 2; Aylor, "Report," 3; and,
    W. A. Capshaw, "Erastus, N.C.," *Church of God Evangel*, August 11,
    1917, 2.

[^74]: A. J. Tomlinson, "Another Good Opportunity," *Church of God
    Evangel*, August 26, 1916, 1.

[^75]: E. D. Hopkins, "Report," *Church of God Evangel*, July 12, 1919,
    3.

[^76]: Ibid.

[^77]: Ibid.

[^78]: From a close reading of reports from 1914 to 1930, Hood and
    Williamson have estimated that serpent handling resulted either
    directly or indirectly in 482 conversions. Hood and Williamson,
    *Them That Believe*, 65.

[^79]: A. J. Tomlinson, "Guilty or Not Guilty?" *Church of God Evangel*,
    October 4, 1916, 1.

[^80]: Membership information is from Charles W. Conn, *Like a Mighty
    Army: A History of the Church of God, 1886-1995* (Cleveland, Tenn.:
    Pathway Press, 1996), 580--581; subscriber information can be found
    in Robins, *A. J. Tomlinson*, 222.

[^81]: Robins, *A. J. Tomlinson*, 226, estimates that about 6,000 of the
    Church of God's 21,000 members followed Tomlinson in his new
    venture. Robins concludes, "as the two sides clarified their
    boundaries it became clear that Tomlinson had lost the lion's share
    of his denomination."

[^82]: William J. Taylor, "The Vipers That Come Out of the Fire," *The
    Latter Rain Evangel*, December 1917, 5--9, CPA, accessed April 8,
    2013,
    [PDF](http://pentecostalarchives.org/digitalPublications/USA/Independent/Latter%20Rain%20Evangel/Unregistered/1917/FPHC/1917\\\_12.pdf).

[^83]: For a representative of this genre see, F. F. Bosworth, "'For
    This Cause Was the Son of God Manifest That He Might Destroy the
    Works of the Devil,'" *The Latter Rain Evangel*, July 1921, 6--9,
    CPA, accessed April 8, 2013,
    [PDF](http://pentecostalarchives.org/digitalPublications/USA/Independent/Latter%20Rain%20Evangel/Unregistered/1921/FPHC/1921\\\_07.pdf).

[^84]: R. G. Robins, *Pentecostalism in America* (Santa Barbara:
    ABC-CLIO, 2010), 34.

[^85]: "In the Great Mission Field," *The Latter Rain Evangel*, April
    1913, 13-14, CPA, accessed April 8, 2013,
    [PDF](http://pentecostalarchives.org/digitalPublications/USA/Independent/Latter%20Rain%20Evangel/Unregistered/1913/FPHC/1913\\\_04.pdf).

[^86]: George R. Berg, "'At Last the Light Is Shining in My Country:'
    Miracles of Healing Wrought in South India," *The Latter Rain
    Evangel*, September 1911, 2--8, CPA, accessed April 9, 2013,
    [PDF](http://pentecostalarchives.org/digitalPublications/USA/Independent/Latter 
    Rain Evangel/Unregistered/1911/FPHC/1911\_09.pdf).

[^87]: See, for example, Ralph W. Burnett, "Victory over Snake Bite,"
    *The Pentecostal Evangel*, July 28, 1923, CPA, accessed April 8,
    2013,
    [PDF](http://pentecostalarchives.org/digitalPublications/USA/Assemblies%20of%20God%20USA/Pentecostal%20Evangel/Unregistered/1923/FPHC/1923\\\_07\\\_28.pdf).
    ; Lucy A. Luttrull, "Healed of Snake Bite," *The Pentecostal
    Evangel*, September 8, 1923, CPA, accessed April 8, 2013,
    [PDF](http://pentecostalarchives.org/digitalPublications/USA/Assemblies%20of%20God%20USA/Pentecostal%20Evangel/Unregistered/1923/FPHC/1923\\\_09\\\_08.pdf);
    E. N. Smith, "A Good Testimony," *The Pentecostal Evangel*,
    September 15, 1923, CPA, accessed April 8, 2013,
    [PDF](http://pentecostalarchives.org/digitalPublications/USA/Assemblies%20of%20God%20USA/Pentecostal%20Evangel/Unregistered/1923/FPHC/1923\\\_09\\\_15.pdf);
    Alice Hannah, "Healed of the Bite of a Serpent," *The Pentecostal
    Evangel*, April 19, 1924, CPA, accessed April 8, 2013,
    [PDF](http://pentecostalarchives.org/digitalPublications/USA/Assemblies%20of%20God%20USA/Pentecostal%20Evangel/Unregistered/1924/FPHC/1924\\\_04\\\_19.pdf);
    "Healed of Snake Bite," *The Pentecostal Evangel*, August 20, 1927,
    CPA, accessed April 8, 2013,
    [PDF](http://pentecostalarchives.org/digitalPublications/USA/Assemblies%20of%20God%20USA/Pentecostal%20Evangel/Unregistered/1927/FPHC/1927\\\_08\\\_27.pdf);
    "Healed of Snakebite," *The Pentecostal Evangel*, September 21,
    1929, CPA, accessed April 8, 2013,
    [PDF](http://pentecostalarchives.org/digitalPublications/USA/Assemblies%20of%20God%20USA/Pentecostal%20Evangel/Unregistered/1929/FPHC/1929\\\_09\\\_21.pdf).

[^88]: Burnett, "Victory over Snake Bite," 8.

[^89]: Hannah, "Healed of the Bite of a Serpent," 7.

[^90]: Luttrull, "Healed of Snake Bite," 11.

[^91]: The Hannah and Luttrull cases were not the only such cases in the
    Assemblies of God; see also, Smith, "A Good Testimony;" and, "Healed
    of Snakebite."

[^92]: Joseph Tunmore, "Why Jesus Took Our Humanity: The Infinite God
    Needs Men to Carry Out His Purpose," *The Latter Rain Evangel*, June
    1929, 11, CPA, accessed April 8, 2013,
    [PDF](http://pentecostalarchives.org/digitalPublications/USA/Independent/Latter%20Rain%20Evangel/Unregistered/1929/FPHC/1929\\\_06.pdf).
    This was hardly a novel position. It had been adopted by many
    pentecostals nearly two decades earlier; see, for example, V. P.
    Simmons, "Casting Out Devils," *The Bridegroom's Messenger*, March
    1, 1910, 2, CPA, accessed April 8, 2013,
    [PDF](http://pentecostalarchives.org/digitalPublications/USA/International%20Pentecostal%20Church%20of%20Christ/Bridegroom%27s%20Messenger/Unregistered/1910/FPHC/1910\\\_03\\\_01.pdf).

[^93]: E. N. Bell, "To Act in the Name of Another: What Does the Bible
    Mean by It?" *The Weekly Evangel*, May 1, 1915, 2; E. N. Bell,
    "Questions and Answers," *The Christian Evangel*, August 9, 1919, 5,
    CPA, accessed April 8, 2013,
    [PDF](http://pentecostalarchives.org/digitalPublications/USA/Assemblies of
    God USA/Pentecostal Evangel/Unregistered/1919/FPHC/1919\_08\_09.pdf);
    and E. N. Bell, "Questions and Answers," *The Pentecostal Evangel*,
    December 13, 1919, 5, CPA, accessed April 8, 2013,
    [PDF](http://pentecostalarchives.org/digitalPublications/USA/Assemblies%20of%20God%20USA/Pentecostal%20Evangel/Unregistered/1919/FPHC/1919\\\_12\\\_13.pdf).

[^94]: Ellis, "Oneonta, AL," 8.

[^95]: Ibid. Ellis's suspicion of serpent handling did not moderate with
    time. In a 1915 letter to A. B. Adams, Ellis wrote, "I had been
    hearing for some time that people were taking up serpents without
    apparent harm, but somehow I had a kind of repulsive feeling toward
    the practice." In this letter Ellis claims that he first witnessed
    handling in 1913 (J. B. Ellis to A. B. Adams, November 23, 1915,
    HBD). Later, in his 1941 autobiography, Ellis wrote, "Frankly, I
    would rather \[serpent handling\] never occurred in my meetings. Be
    very careful because it is unsafe unless you are sure God is with
    you and will protect you." See James Benton Ellis, *Blazing the
    Gospel Trail* (Plainfield, N.J.: Logos International, 1976), 71.

[^96]: M. S. Lemons, "A Misappropriation of His Power," *Church of God
    Evangel*, May 3, 1919, 2.

[^97]: Ibid.

[^98]: Ibid.

[^99]: Ibid.

[^100]: Ibid., 3.

[^101]: Pentecostal Holiness Advocate, May 10, 1917, 12--13.

[^102]: Kane, "Snake Handlers of Southern Appalachia," argued that
    serpent handling was at least partially responsible for drawing
    converts to the Church of God and was seen as direct threat to the
    Pentecostal Holiness Church (53-55). W. J. Noble, "Beware of the
    Church God," *Pentecostal Holiness Advocate*, October 11, 1917,
    seems to support Kane's argument (2-3).

[^103]: Hattie M. Barth, "Misdirected Power," *The Bridegroom's
    Messenger*, April 1919, 1, CPA, accessed April 8, 2013,
    [PDF](http://pentecostalarchives.org/digitalPublications/USA/International
    Pentecostal Church of Christ/Bridegroom's
    Messenger/Unregistered/1919/FPHC/1919\_04.pdf).

[^104]: See Acts 28:1--6.

[^105]: Barth, "Misdirected Power," 1.

[^106]: Hattie M. Barth, "To Our Friends: Who Have Made Objection to Our
    Article in the Bridegroom's Messenger, April Issue, Entitled
    'Misdirected Power,'" June 1919, 2, CPA, accessed April 8, 2013,
    [PDF](http://pentecostalarchives.org/digitalPublications/USA/International
    Pentecostal Church of Christ/Bridegroom's
    Messenger/Unregistered/1919/FPHC/1919_06.pdf).

[^107]: Ibid.

[^108]: W. Jethro Walthall, "Bro. Walthall's Good Report," *The Weekly
    Evangel*, September 29, 1917, 13, CPA, accessed April 8, 2013,
    [PDF](http://pentecostalarchives.org/digitalPublications/USA/Assemblies%20of%20God%20USA/Pentecostal%20Evangel/Unregistered/1917/FPHC/1917\\\_09\\\_29.pdf).

[^109]: Crews, *The Church of God*, 90-101.

[^110]: Tomlinson neither suggested that handling snakes was essential
    for church fellowship nor that it was a necessary indication of Holy
    Spirit baptism. The only necessary evidence of the latter was
    speaking in tongues (Robins, *A. J. Tomlinson*, 190). Many
    historians have suggested that the Church of God "officially" banned
    serpent handling in 1928, yet as Hood and Williamson point out, the
    church never made an explicit statement on the practice and instead
    downplayed its importance as a manifestation of Holy Spirit baptism
    (Hood and Williamson, *Them that Believe*, 72).

[^111]: Heath supported of the sign of handling if it is properly
    preformed. He wrote, "Let God do the saving and taking care of the
    signs. If it becomes necessary to convince an unbeliever, He can
    furnish the serpent and the man" (S. J. Heath, "Signs Following
    Believers," *Church of God Evangel*, June 28, 1928, 3).

[^112]: Ibid.

[^113]: Ernest S. Williams, "Unbelief," *The Pentecostal Evangel*, July
    4, 1925, 27. Williams would return to the topic multiple times in
    his career: Ernest S. Williams, "Workers Together With Him," *The
    Pentecostal Evangel*, February 4, 1939, 2, CPA, accessed April 8,
    2013,
    [PDF](http://pentecostalarchives.org/digitalPublications/USA/Assemblies%20of%20God%20USA/Pentecostal%20Evangel/Unregistered/1939/FPHC/1939_02_04.pdf);
    Ernest S. Williams, "Your Questions," *The Pentecostal Evangel*,
    January 12, 1958, 23, CPA, accessed April 8, 2013,
    [PDF](http://pentecostalarchives.org/digitalPublications/USA/Assemblies%20of%20God%20USA/Pentecostal%20Evangel/Unregistered/1958/FPHC/1958_01_12.pdf);
    Ernest S. Williams, "Your Questions," The Pentecostal Evangel,
    August 17, 1958, 19, CPA, accessed April 8, 2013,
    [PDF](http://pentecostalarchives.org/digitalPublications/USA/Assemblies%20of%20God%20USA/Pentecostal%20Evangel/Unregistered/1958/FPHC/1958_08_17.pdf).
    The fact that he returned to the topic in his "Your Questions"
    columns indicates that the issue remained a matter of some
    curiosity.

[^114]: C. E. Robinson, "What Should a Christian Do?" *The Pentecostal
    Evangel*, August 10, 1929, 9, CPA, accessed April 8, 2013,
    [PDF](http://pentecostalarchives.org/digitalPublications/USA/Assemblies%20of%20God%20USA/Pentecostal%20Evangel/Unregistered/1929/FPHC/1929_08_10.pdf).
    See also, J. Narver Gortner, "They Shall Take Up Serpents," *The
    Pentecostal Evangel*, January 28, 1928, 3, CPA, accessed April 8,
    2013,
    [PDF](http://pentecostalarchives.org/digitalPublications/USA/Assemblies%20of%20God%20USA/Pentecostal%20Evangel/Unregistered/1928/FPHC/1928_01_28.pdf).

[^115]: The last positive reference to serpent handling appears to be J.
    S. Robert, "Signs Following Believers," *Church of God Evangel*,
    November 30, 1935, 3.

[^116]: E. L. Simmons, "Believers and Signs," *Church of God Evangel*,
    November 11, 1939, 4; emphasis mine.

[^117]: Quoted in Burton, *Serpent-Handling Believers*, 81.

[^118]: Coverage of deaths included Charles Pennington, "Snake-Handling
    'Preacher' Dies of Rattler's Bite in Ceremony," *Chattanooga Times*,
    September 5, 1945, 1; and, "Tennessee Preacher, Virginia Woman Die
    of Snake Bites in Rites of Religious Sect," *New York Times*,
    September 5, 1945, 25. Local coverage of conflicts between handlers
    and state and municipal authorities include Fred Travis, "Bradley
    Baffled by Snake Problem," *Chattanooga Times*, August 28, 1946, 9;
    and, "Bradley Paper Seeks to 'Ban' Snake Handling," *Chattanooga
    News-Free Press*, September 4, 1946, 5. In one notable story, police
    promptly arrested G. W. Hensley and another preacher, Tom Harden,
    for handling poisonous snakes within the city limits at an East
    Chattanooga revival. A detective "blasted the head from the snake
    with a shotgun," then kept the snake's rattlers as a trophy and
    proudly showed off the creature's fangs to curious observers. Alex
    Corliss, "2 'Faith-Healing' Ministers Held for Handling Snake in
    City Limits," *Chattanooga Times*, September 24, 1945, 1.

[^119]: Quoted in Burton, *Serpent-Handling Believers*, 75.

[^120]: See, respectively, "Religion: They Shall Take Up Serpents,"
    Newsweek, August 21, 1944, 88--89; "Americana," *Time*, March 10,
    1947, 22--23; "Sect Leader Indignant at Darden Threat," *Washington
    Post*, July 25, 1945, 3; Archie Robertson, *That Old-Time Religion*
    (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1950), 169--181.

[^121]: The derision and contempt in these stories is palpable. One
    story reported on the "\[r\]attlers and copperheads" "being passed
    about in a meeting with as much sangfroid" as a society lady
    "serving tea to her guest" ("Proselyting with Snakes," *Chattanooga
    Daily Times*, September 16, 1914, 3). Several papers reported that
    Hensley had promised to walk across the Tennessee River only to
    eventually abandon the miraculous project much to the cynical
    pleasure of the stories' authors ("He Can Handle Snakes but Will He
    Walk the River?" 3; "Holy Rollers Anoint One of Their Patients," 2).
    Others reported on the sadistic ways skeptics hoped to test the
    authenticity of the handlers' signs, including accounts of Hensley
    being challenged to drink carbolic acid ("Snakes in Demand,"
    *Cleveland Herald*, September 17, 1914, 1; and, "Reptile in the
    Meetin'," *Chattanooga Daily Times*, September 21, 1914, 3).

[^122]: The church went so far as to pass a resolution at the Eleventh
    General Assembly in 1915 that "disclaim\[ed\] and repudiate\[d\] the
    title 'Holy Rollers' in reference to the Church of God" (quoted in
    Davidson, Upon This Rock, 1:448). See also Paul Harvey, *Freedom's
    Coming: Religious Culture and the Shaping of the South from the
    Civil War Through the Civil Rights Era* (Chapel Hill: University of
    North Carolina Press, 2005), 140--141.

[^123]: "Proselyting with Snakes," 3.

[^124]: This is not to say that "holy roller" disappeared from all
    coverage of pentecostalism and serpent handling. The term lingered
    for decades, but it became progressively less visible, especially in
    reporting on snake handling.

[^125]: Hood and Williamson, *Them That Believe*, 212, noted that the
    family that owned the New York Times also owned local Tennessee
    papers, a fact that contributed to the *Times*'s frequent coverage
    of the practice and also helps explain why the *Times* was one of
    the earliest national publications to adopt "snake handling" to
    label the practice.

[^126]: See, respectively, "Snake-rite Leaders Fast," *New York Times*,
    August 4, 1940, 31; "Wave Rattler in Frenzy," *New York Times*,
    August 19, 1935, 17; "Snakes Kill Preacher," *New York Times*,
    October 1, 1936, 15; and, "Snake Defiers Jailed," *New York Times*,
    August 1, 1940, 18; and, "Snake-bitten Child Remains Untreated,"
    *New York Times*, August 3, 1940, 28; "Snake at Service Bites 3
    Cultists," *New York Times*, August 6, 1940, 21.

[^127]: "Snake-Handling Cultists Resemble Other Groups," *The Science
    News-Letter* 38.7 (1940): 103.

[^128]: Richard Golden, "Snake-handling' Woman Bitten Because of Lack of
    Faith, She Declares," *Knoxville News-Sentinel*, September 1939,
    Clipping File, Chattanooga Public Library, Chattanooga, Tennessee
    (hereafter cited as CPL). Golden also used the term in
    "Snake-handlers Are Like Jitterbugs, Psychologist Says," *Knoxville
    News-Sentinel*, September 1939, CPL.

[^129]: "Serpent-Handling Preacher Here, Bitten by Deadly Snake, Refuses
    Medical Attention, Says 'Faith Will Heal' Him of Poisonous Venom,"
    *Knoxville News-Sentinel*, July 3, 1940, 1; "Many Healthy Men Could
    'Take' Snakebite Says U-T Man---But He Doesn't Advise It,"
    *Knoxville News-Sentinel*, July 9, 1940, 1, CPL.

[^130]: See, respectively, "Many Healthy Men Could 'Take' Snakebite," 1;
    "Snake-Handling Cultists Resemble Other Groups;" Golden,
    "Snake-handlers Are Like Jitterbugs, Psychologist Says," and Thomas
    Barensfeld, "Brain-Washing No Monopoly of Reds, Author Points Out,"
    *Cleveland Plain Dealer*, June 23, 1957, AHN.

[^131]: E. L. Simmons, "Religion and Snakes," *Church of God Evangel*,
    June 1, 1940, 4.

[^132]: Ibid.

[^133]: Crews, *The Church of God*, 138--139.

[^134]: Jonathan Z. Smith, "Classification," in *Guide to the Study of
    Religion*, ed. Willi Braun and Russell T. McCutcheon (New York:
    Cassell, 2000), 38.

[^135]: Jonathan Z. Smith, "Differential Equations: On Constructing the
    Other," in *Relating Religion: Essays in the Study of Religion*
    (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2004), 230--250.

[^136]: "Snake Kills Cultist," *New York Times*, July 26, 1955, 12;
    "Cultist Dies of Snakebite; Believed Dolley Pond Leader,"
    Chattanooga Times, July 25, 1955, 3.

[^137]: Kimbrough, *Taking up Serpents*, 133; Burton, *Serpent-Handling
    Believers*, 57.

[^138]: "Snakebitten Preacher Dies; Listed as Suicide for Shunning
    Medicine," *Chattanooga Times*, July 26, 1955, 9. Hensley was hardly
    alone; see, for example, "Snakebite Death Is Ruled Suicide,"
    Times-Picayune, July 28, 1959, AHN; and, "Judge Bans Handling of
    Snakes, but Okays Drinking Strychnine," *Times-Picayune*, April 22,
    1973, AHN.

  [Image 1]: 01_Lee-NWDNS-245-MS-2634L.jpg
  [Image 2]: 02_Church_of_God_Elders_Council_1917.jpg
  [Image 3]: 03_JB_Collins_1.jpg
  [Image 4]: 04_JB_Collins_2.jpg
