---
layout: article
title: "Review: Spectacular Wickedness"
author-first: Michael
author-last: Pasquier
author: Michael Pasquier
author-note: "Michael Pasquier is an associate professor of Religious Studies at Louisiana State University."
vol: 15
year: 2013
book-reviewed: "Emily Epstein Landau. Spectacular Wickedness: Sex, Race, and Memory in Storyville, New Orleans. Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University, 2013. xviii + 310 pp. ISBN 978-0-80715-014-6."
---

Today, the popular image of Storyville as the most (in)famous
prostitution district in American history is mostly myth. It is a
product of the marketing devices of New Orleans's tourism industry, the
commercial interests of local business owners, the willful ignorance of
city residents, and the mindless consumption of visiting revelers. Emily
Epstein Landau joins a string of historians interested in replacing
Storyville's mystified past with "the trauma of poverty, racism, and
gender inequality" that developed out of "the material reality of
prostitution and Jim Crow in turn-of-the-century New Orleans" (206).
More than a book about people having sex in a red light district,
*Spectacular Wickedness* situates Storyville at the center of moral
contests over sex and race that were happening in New Orleans and
throughout the United States.

The opening of Storyville on January 1, 1898, was the product of a city
council ordinance that legalized prostitution within nineteen square
blocks north of the French Quarter in New Orleans. At the time, the
establishment of a vice district was nothing new, given that most
American cities with more than 100,000 residents also included
prostitution districts within their borders. The turn of the century was
an era marked by the moral visions of progressive reformers interested
in meeting the social challenges of urbanization and industrialization.
From the perspectives of these reformers---most of whom were white,
middle-class, Christian men---the legalization of prostitution districts
was a hallmark of modern thinking and an instrument of the state to
quarantine peoples, actions, and ideas deemed undesirable, immoral, and
"other." To wit, Storyville became "a stage for acting out cultural
fantasies of white supremacy, patriarchal power, and a renewed vision of
American manhood," with women of color playing the leading and sometimes
tragic roles (1).

Chapter One, "The Promised Land of Harlotry," is a sprint through the
streets of Storyville and the history of prostitution in New Orleans.
Landau introduces the men, women, music, and bordellos that made up the
daily happenings of Storyville from 1898 to 1917. Then she goes back in
time to the colonial origin and antebellum flourishing of prostitution
in the city, choosing, somewhat uncritically, to elaborate on Herbert
Asbury's characterization of New Orleans "as the promised land of
harlotry" (38). Chapter Two, "The Quadroon Connection," is a
continuation of Landau's development of the historical context of
Storyville with an eye toward the legacies of race and racism in New
Orleans. It was no accident, according to Landau, that *Plessy v.
Ferguson*---the U.S. Supreme Court case that found racial segregation to
be constitutional in 1896---involved a man of mixed race from New
Orleans. Storyville, when it came to interracialism, turned the
prohibition against sex across the color line on its head, with women of
color playing the part of the "tragic octoroon" in ways that Landau
finds similar to the buying and selling of "fancy girls" in slave
markets and the *pla√ßage* (interracial concubinage) associated with
quadroon balls.

Out of this historical context, Landau uses the remaining four chapters
to explore the intersection of racial and sexual politics in Storyville.
Chapter Three, "Public Rights and Public Women," identifies the origin
of Storyville with political and economic initiatives to make New
Orleans a "respectable" place for businesses to grow and tourism to
thrive. The segregation of commercial sex was a product of this New
South outlook, but one that mapped onto similar efforts at racial
segregation. Chapter Four, "Where the Light and Dark Folks Meet,"
highlights the irony of quarantining interracial sexual license, in that
"Storyville promoted and profited from marketing miscegenation at a time
when interracial sex was strictly forbidden and black/white distinctions
were supposed to be absolute" (110). Chapter Five, "Diamond Queen,"
stands out in *Spectacular Wickedness* for its focus on the life of
Storyville's "most notorious madam," Lulu White, and the women of color
who attracted so much attention from white males (132). In this
"dialectic of repulsion and desire," Landau chronicles Lulu White's
"life on the color line ... to see that line for what it often was:
blurry, ambiguous, false, and, nonetheless, vigorously grasped and
violently enforced" (134). And Chapter Six, "The Last Stronghold of the
Old Regime," documents the closure of Storyville in 1917 by discussing
larger progressive initiatives that came out of the Spanish-American War
and World War I. As "an ideationally bounded, liminal space," Landau
concludes that Storyville was more than just a peculiar site in an
equally peculiar city (200). Rather, "Storyville was part of the
transition from slavery's racial patriarchy to the New South's fraternal
white supremacy, from slavery, that is, to segregation" (200).

The chief strength of Spectacular Wickedness is the connection that it
makes between white supremacy, racial segregation, and sexual
legislation in the New South. Landau shows how the progressive dreams
and sexual fantasies of white male reformers crystalized in Storyville,
resulting in a porous *cordon sanitaire* that exemplified regional and
national visions for a modern society. Landau's scrupulously researched
profile of Lulu White, in particular, is a model for historians
interested in giving voice to women of color so often absent from the
archival record. That being said, Spectacular Wickedness is also a
reminder of how little we can know of the women who lived and worked and
dreamed in Storyville. With a keen understanding of this erasure of the
past, Landau ends her book with the words of Abigail Adams echoing in
her head---"remember the ladies"---knowing full well that there is so
much that we will never know about Storyville. The faces and bodies of
the kind photographed by Ernest Bellocq and portrayed on the cover of
Spectacular Wickedness reinforce Landau's parting words and encourage
others to continue the work of historical discovery.
