---
layout: article
title: "Review: Desire and Divine"
author-first: Laura Sloan
author-last: Patterson
author: Laura Sloan Patterson
author-note: "Laura Sloan Patterson is an associate professor of English at Seton Hill University."
vol: 15
year: 2013
book-reviewed: "Kathaleen E. Amende. Desire and the Divine: Feminine Identity in White Southern Women's Writing. Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 2013. xii + 162 pp. ISBN 978-0-8071-5083-2. "
---

In the late 1990s, Anne Goodwyn Jones and Susan Donaldson (*Haunted
Bodies*, 1997) and later Patricia Yaeger (*Dirt and Desire*, 2000),
challenged readers to re-examine bodies within southern texts. Yaeger
analyzed the body through the lens of race, while Jones and Donaldson
focused their collection on gender and the body, although both texts
acknowledge matrices of gendered and racial identities. For these
critics and others, the body has proven to be a rich topic for feminist
critique within southern studies.

Religion's primary role within southern fiction has long been
established, as works such as Susan Ketchin's *The Christ-Haunted
Landscape* (1994) demonstrate. In *Desire and the Divine*, Kathaleen
Amende brings a focus on bodies into this conversation. Chapters guide
readers through the moments when bodies and religion interact in a
variety of contemporary southern texts by white women, including
Rosemary Daniell, Sheri Reynolds, Dorothy Allison, Valerie Martin, Lee
Smith, and Connie May Fowler. Amende's particular interest, however, is
the body in the grip of passion: "the moment of passion that is
unidentifiable as being either religious or sexual" (1). She argues that
these writers' young white characters often sublimate sexual desires
into more "appropriate" religious pursuits, creating Foucauldian
heterotopias---spaces "where the two desires, religious and secular,
combine" (26).

Readers might imagine that this argument leads to a vague sort of
empowerment or agency for female characters, a kind of "happily ever
after" feminist critique. Yet that is not at all where Amende takes us.
Instead, in a move her title and subtitle do not predict, Amende
squarely faces and analyzes the psychic and material culture of a wide
variety of masochism, including self-mutilation, masochistic fantasy,
and S/M sexual play. In this analysis, these acts occur in a special
place where the sacred and the erotic meet and can be employed in a
quest for religious or mystical ecstasy. What begins as an elegantly
simple thesis becomes an interrogation of the meaning of gendered power,
pain as a "gendered object," and access to the divine (142).

Although Amende clearly writes for a literary audience, she avoids
jargon, even when explaining her particular use of Foucault and Freud,
making her work appropriate for a more general audience as well. Casual
readers of Lee Smith and Dorothy Allison will find surprising new ways
of exploring favorite texts, and teachers may glean ideas for
uncomfortable but productive classroom discussions. For instance, Bone,
the main character from *Bastard Out of Carolina*, becomes less a victim
of abuse acting out her sexual repression, and more a survivor creating
a sexually safe place through sadomasochistic fantasies. Admirers of
Fowler and Reynolds will appreciate how a careful critique opens up
texts sometimes regarded as more popular than literary (Reynolds's *The
Rapture of Canaan* was an Oprah's Book Club pick), although Amende
wisely makes no such distinction herself. For feminist scholars of
southern literature, especially those with an interest in body culture,
Amende's work is a valuable addition to that of Yaeger, Jones,
Donaldson, and Minrose Gwin. Southern studies scholars who have found
Elaine Scarry's *The Body in Pain* (1985) useful will welcome a text
that explores some of the same philosophical territory in terms of
southern literature.

The final chapter of *Desire and the Divine*, "Contemporary
Repercussions," offers a quick primer on feminist theology as well as a
fascinating jumping off point for discussions of sexuality and religion
outside southern literature---in mega-churches, "reform" groups for gay
Christians, and online churches catering to the sex work industry. Here,
Amende makes a strong case for the relevance of her topic not only
within the field of southern literature, but more broadly within
southern studies and cultural studies of the United States.
