---
author: 'Katherine E. Rohrer'
author-first: 'Katherine E.'
author-last: Rohrer
author-note: |
    Katherine E. Rohrer is a Ph.D. candidate in History at the University of
    Georgia.
layout: article
title: |
    Slaveholding Women and the Religious Instruction of Slaves in
    Post-Emancipation Memory
vol: 15
year: 2013
---

"Well, bless ye little heart, honey, ye say ye is wan' me to tell ye
'bout how de people lived way back dere in slavery time. Honey, I
dunno wha' to tell ye cause I ain' never been treated no ways but good
in my life by my Missus."[^1] These are the supposed first words
spoken by Mom Hester Hunter, a maternal eighty-five-year-old former
slave from Marion, South Carolina, to her interviewer, Annie Ruth
Davis, a white Works Progress Administration (W.P.A.) employee. Davis
interviewed Hunter on three occasions between May and October 1937.
Through these three interviews, Davis and Hunter engaged in lively
discussion, with the latter recalling many fond, personally emotional
memories about her mistress, Sara Davis Bethea. At the conclusion of
the first interview Hunter revealed, "I know my Missus gone to Hebbun,
honey, en I hope se restin' dere."[^2]

Mom Hester Hunter remembered her mistress consoling her in times of
sorrow, accompanying her to the slave graveyard to pay homage to the
deceased, ensuring that she always had well-made clothes and a clean
bed, sharing meals with her, taking trips to town with her, and gently
instilling in her a sense of morality. During the second interview
Hunter revealed just how well she thought of her former mistress, "Yes,
mam, I love my old Missus better den I ever love honey an flour bread
cause she was a dear old soul."[^3] While Hunter shared a trove of
memories with Davis, she spoke at length about the special times she
shared with her mistress on Sundays in church, expressing gratitude for
the ways by which evangelical Christianity had enriched her life. Hunter
forever associated her religious identity and beliefs with her mistress:

> My God, child, people never know nothin but to go to church on de big
> Sunday in dat day en time. No, mam, dey know dat dey Massa rule en
> didn' nobody have no mind to question nothin bout it. My Old Missus
> was a dear old soul en she would see to it dat all her niggers wash en
> iron en cook on Saturday cause she never allow no work gwine on round
> whe' she was when Sunday come, be dat she know bout it. I remember my
> old Massa en Missus used to ride to church in dey big black carriage
> en dey always would carry me en Bob [her brother] right dere in de
> carriage wid dem somewho another. Stuff us down ‘tween de seats
> somewhe'. I recollects just as bright as de stars be shinin old Missus
> would carry me en Bob to de same little seats we been sit in every
> Sunday en den she en old Massa would go to dey certain pew in de front
> part of de church.[^4]

Later recalling the importance of white-directed Christian instruction
in her life and the lives of other slaves on the Bethea plantation,
Hunter remarked, "Dat been a mighty good thing, child, been a mighty
good thing. Honey, it been de rule to follow what de Bible say do in dat
day en time en now it seem like de rule must be, do like you see de
other fellow is doin."[^5]

Hunter's comment about emancipation, a day she "hates to think bout,"
further suggests an emotional bond with her mistress.[^6] According to
Hunter, at the end of the Civil War, Mrs. Bethea informed her slaves
that they were free but allowed them to remain on the plantation if they
so desired. Hunter could not imagine leaving her mistress. She told her
W.P.A. interviewer that her mistress was her "white mammy en I stay dere
long as she live too. Didn' want no better livin den I was gettin right
dere. It was a Paradise, be dat what I calls it."[^7] This illuminates
an especially close mistress-slave relationship—one obviously influenced
by the scriptural and theological traditions of evangelical
Christianity—as *remembered many decades later* by one former bondswoman.
It is an idealized portrait of antebellum slavery that would support any
southern apologist's contentions about the benevolent nature of the
institution. Such a portrayal though does not align with most scholarly
descriptions of mistress-slave relationships.

This essay scrutinizes former slaves' memories of religious education,
including Mom Hester Hunter, as well as those of the former slaveholding
women who imparted such instruction and values. It examines post-bellum
memories of mistress-slave relationships, specifically as they related
to the teachings of evangelical Christianity. Thus, what follows is not
a discussion of slave religious education presented by slaveholding
women as it occurred. Rather, this article presents an analysis of the
politics of the memories of slave religious education by both former
slaveholding women and former bondspeople. Most distinctively, this
essay argues that there was a partial convergence of white and black
narratives of the past during the late nineteenth and early twentieth
centuries, and in so doing, it assesses such narratives vis-à-vis the
realities of the post-bellum South. Alternately stated, this article
contends that the memories of former slaveholding women and former
bondspeople were both similar and very much products of their time.

This essay dissents from much of the historiography on mistress-slave
relationships, particularly in reference to Christian instruction.
Relying largely upon antebellum sources, rather than those dating from
the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, previous scholars
have characterized mistress-slave relationships in (often) conflicting
ways.[^8] However, in spite of their differing conclusions, nearly all
stressed the many obstacles that strained such relationships, including
those in the realm of Christian instruction. Antebellum
sources—specifically mistresses' diaries that were never published
commercially as well as book-length slave accounts that were intended to
incite abolitionist beliefs—reveal that slave missions in general and
mistress-directed Christian education in particular were not successful.
In fact, plantation mistresses were seldom reticent to record feelings
of frustration, anger, or indifference about their respective roles as
religious educators in their diaries.[^9] Likewise, antebellum
African-American sources collectively suggest that many white plantation
women were *not* high-minded, kind, or supportive in their efforts as
Christian educators and role models.[^10] For example, antebellum black
sources highlight disturbing contradictions between mistress religious
instruction and mistress behavior and attitude. Not surprisingly, many
enslaved African Americans consequently chose to create and practice
their own "brand" of Christianity, one that typically incorporated
aspects of traditional African religions with limited input from their
mistresses.[^11]

Unlike these antebellum sources, white and black post-Civil War sources
contain a number of similarities, including an idealized portrayal of
mistress-directed Christian education specifically and mistress-slave
relationships more generally. By exploring how African-American sources
echo, support, and complement the content of mistress memoirs, this
essay also addresses the complex nature of race relations and memory.
Even during this era characterized by exceedingly poor race relations,
these two populations found common ground when remembering slave
evangelization in the antebellum South. This overlap indicates how
different sets of social and racial pressures could and did produce
similar accounts of a contested past. This essay draws on a deep well of
post-bellum primary sources to see how southern whites and blacks
remembered their intertwined pasts. Approximately forty post-bellum
memoirs written by former-slaveholding women, the majority published
between 1895 and 1915, reveal white-constructed memories of evangelical
Christianity.[^12] Black-constructed memories were deduced using nearly
2,000 W.P.A. slave narratives, memoirs written by former bondspeople,
and biographies of former slaves written by the subject's family and
friends.

While this essay disagrees with the historiography on mistress-slave
relationships, the sources used and the conclusions presented correlate
well with the relatively new focus on history through the lens of
memory. Specifically, it engages a growing literature on southern and
Civil War memory in which scholars collectively have argued that race
significantly shaped the ways white southerners chose to remember, and
just as importantly forget, aspects of the antebellum and Civil War
eras.[^13] As a group, these monographs consider the reasons why a
nostalgic and excessively sentimental version of the antebellum South
and Civil War as envisioned by white southerners dominated the southern
mind. They likewise explore those reasons why an emancipationist memory
of the war, as asserted by such African American leaders as Frederick
Douglass, Henry Highland Garnett and W. E. B. Du Bois, was
jettisoned.[^14] Nonetheless, a lacuna in the historiography is the
relationship between memory and religion, specifically the process of
Christian education. This essay begins to fill this void. Additionally,
in contrast to scholars who focus upon differing historical memories,
this essay reveals an example of converging white and black narratives
during the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.[^15]

Many southern figures perpetuated white-constructed memories of the
South, slavery, and the Civil War. Elite white women, both individually
and as members of their culturally powerful auxiliary organizations such
as the United Daughters of the Confederacy (U.D.C.), were one such
group.[^16] During the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries,
middle-class and elite white women of the South boldly entered the world
of publishing to an extent never seen before. Historian Sarah Gardner
maintains that such women fought for a white supremacist, patriarchal,
political order and further argues that they participated equally with
their male counterparts in creating a discourse about the South that
promoted the transformation of racism into philanthropy.[^17] As pen and
ink warriors, such women saw themselves as invaluable participants in
the production of a narrative of the antebellum South and Civil War that
reflected the values of their region, race and class. For many elite
southern women their memoirs were a means through which they could
educate—or even indoctrinate—a new generation of southerners (and
northerners) about the benevolent nature of antebellum slavery. One can
thus surmise that former slaveholding women's memories were just as much
fiction as fact.[^18] These commercial-audience memoirs included
specific discussions of religious relationships enjoyed between
mistresses and slaves.[^19]

Almost universally, these memoirs represent mistress-slave relationships
in a positive, warm, and even nostalgic manner. Significantly, a
representative sample of mistress memoirs complement the contents of the
then-burgeoning literature of white southern apologia published in the
late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. In a manner similar to
that of the now-discredited historian U. B. Phillips—whose works praised
plantation owners, denied their brutality, and argued that such persons
provided for the physical and spiritual needs of their
slaves—mistresses' memoirs described their relationships with
bondspeople as enlightened. This especially included any religious
setting. Like Phillips, who portrayed the plantation as a school whose
mission was to "civilize" and "enlighten" a "lowly" slave population,
many former slaveholding women reflected upon their tireless efforts
decades before to evangelize their slaves.[^20] As late as 1922,
Elizabeth W. Allston Pringle, a former South Carolina mistress,
reflected upon advice imparted to her mother by her mother's aunt:

> It is a very noble life, if a woman does her full duty in it. It is
> the life of a missionary, really; one must teach, train, uplift,
> encourage—always encourage, even in reproof. I grant you it is a life
> of effort, but, my child, it is our life; the life of those who have
> great responsibility of owning human beings. We are responsible before
> our Master for not only their bodies, but their souls; and never must
> we for one moment forget that. To be the wife of a rice-planter is no
> place for a pleasure-loving, indolent woman, but for an earnest,
> true-hearted woman it is a great opportunity.[^21]

The degree to which former mistresses selectively remembered, or even
revised their personal histories, takes on new meaning when compared to
those produced shortly after the Civil War. In many cases, such
self-portrayals differ from those produced toward the end of
Reconstruction and beyond. During the first few years after the Civil
War some ex-slaveholding women expressed frustration, disappointment,
and hostility toward their slaves, all of which was consistent with
those expressed in antebellum diaries. For example, Ella Gertrude Thomas
of Georgia, still distraught over the outcome of the Civil War, wrote in
October 1865: "I did not know until then how intimately my faith in
*Revelations* and my faith in the institution of slavery had been woven
together—true I had seen the evil of the latter but if the Bible was
right then slavery *must* be—Slavery was done away with and my faith in
God's Holy Book was terribly shaken. For a time, I doubted God."[^22]
One should not be surprised about the intensity of feeling. Many elite
whites were facing life with vastly diminished resources and in a
different social order.

Thus, one must consider the reasons why aging former slaveholding women
*chose* to portray themselves—and more generally the antebellum South—in a
"better" light long after the Civil War. Some wished to preserve in
memory a life and a culture that were irrecoverable. In other ways,
their reiteration of antebellum defenses of slavery was an indirect
means of supporting the sharecropping and tenant farmer systems—systems
that continued to disadvantage African Americans. In other cases, elite
white women hoped to justify their former privilege and in so doing
ameliorate their post-emancipation guilt. Relatedly, some wished to
validate their antebellum lives in the eyes of their grandchildren and
other descendants; they felt compelled to characterize themselves in
ways that highlighted the white South's maternalist expectations of its
elite women. Some completely disregarded or discounted the feelings
within the African American community and painted any picture—regardless
of its accuracy—knowing that they would not be censured. More
practically, some women, who were in a precarious financial state after
the war published memoirs that would appeal to the widest possible
commercial audience, even at the expense of veracity. And finally, the
precise workings of long-term memory remain largely unknown. In other
words, what, why, and how ex-slaveholding women remembered events from
several decades earlier lack absolute truth even if their intentions
were honorable.[^23]

Ex-slaveholding women, however, were not the sole chroniclers of
mistress-slave interactions. Former slaves expressed memories of their
past lives in a variety of post-bellum sources. Many former bondspeople
divulged their personal histories to the W.P.A. in the 1930s. Important
to emphasize, however, is that the W.P.A. slave narratives were not
commercially produced as were many memoirs authored by ex-slaveholding
women. Equally important to acknowledge is the little standardization of
interview questions asked of former slaves.[^24] These ex-slaves—then
elderly and in the midst of the Great Depression of the 1930s—may have
presented a more benign characterization of slave life than what had
existed in reality for reasons many historians have already explored.
Nonetheless, it is worth identifying some of those more significant
factors that shaped African-American responses to the W.P.A. The Great
Depression was especially challenging for those on the lowest economic
rungs. Thus, for ex-slaves, the memory of childhood recalled a more
"secure" experience. Before emancipation they presumably had housing,
food, clothing, an extended family, and adults who took care of them.
The difficulties of extreme poverty in old age were measured against the
circumstances of their youth.[^25]

Other factors shaping the W.P.A. narratives included: 1) an unequal
social dynamic in which blacks felt compelled to defer to their white
interviewers; 2) some African Americans may have hoped that by
"impressing" white interviewers they might avail themselves of
charitable contributions; 3) memory at every stage of life is a
complicated phenomenon, and the end of life is especially so. In old age
individuals regularly work to find meaning, and that process frequently
employs considerable individual revision.[^26] For some former
bondspeople in the 1930s, their benign characterization of life under
slavery included their description of their mistress-directed Christian
instruction.[^27]

Although a number of factors affected the content and tone of the W.P.A.
slave narratives, one must appreciate the omnipresence of white
supremacy in the Jim Crow South. During the 1930s, African Americans
still experienced racist violence, unwanted sexual advances, poor
employment opportunities, and substandard housing. In order to eek out
even the most basic of existences, African Americans understood that
deference was essential. As historian Paul Escott has explained about
slave narratives, "all the rules of racial etiquette had to be observed,
and the informant had to give priority to appeasing his interviewer
rather than telling the truth about the past."[^28]

Other valuable black sources include late nineteenth- and early
twentieth-century memoirs authored by former slaves as well as
biographies of former slaves written by younger African Americans. Such
authors of the latter were personally well-acquainted with their
subjects but may not have lived during slavery themselves. Several of
the reasons why former slaves positively described their antebellum
mistress-directed Christian instruction in the W.P.A. slave narratives
also apply to these other post-bellum black sources. Furthermore, even
though the authors of these memoirs and biographies tended to be elite
members of their communities, they still understood the realities of
tense race relations and the necessity of garnering white financial
support for their communities, including for their churches and
religiously-founded colleges. These realities affected such
publications.

A large number of ex-slaves indicated in their post-bellum sources that
they had received no religious instruction at all, be it from their
mistress, master, or white clergyman. For example, the W.P.A. testimony
indicated that, in some cases, the mistress expressed no interest in
evangelizing slaves, and, in others, she was illiterate and thus
incapable of biblical teaching.[^29] This essay maintains that of those
ex-bondspeople who did discuss their mistress-directed religious
experiences in post-bellum sources characterized them in a decidedly
positive way.[^30] In fact, such ex-slaves identified the mistress as
being second only to white clergymen as the individual who had most
instructed them about Christianity. As a group, ex-bondspeople preferred
their mistresses to white clergymen or their evangelical masters, who
they typically painted as manipulators who used Christianity as a
controlling device.

Acknowledging and comparing these two voices of the slaveholding South,
the former mistress and the former bondsperson, elucidates their similar
and overlapping memories of evangelical Christian instruction in the
antebellum South. The following themes found in ex-slaveholding women's
memoirs—which are supported by African American sources—include: 1) the
far greater detail of their experiences as slave religious educators in
their post-bellum memoirs than in their pre-war diaries, 2) the frequent
use of such labels as "enlightenment" and "civilization" by
ex-plantation mistresses in their reference to the benefits of religious
instruction for slaves, 3) the assumption by ex-mistresses that their
former slaves were grateful for their Christian education and
mentorship, and 4) the habit of ex-mistresses to describe their
relationships during slavery with their bondspeople in much the same way
as they described their relationships with their biological children.

* * * * *

In their memoirs ex-mistresses chose to discuss the contents of
religious instruction in significantly greater length and specificity
than they did in the antebellum diaries. Comparisons of these two genres
are significant because they reveal considerable revisionism. For
example, antebellum sources referenced very few examples of teaching
except for three old standards: the Lord's Prayer, the Apostles' Creed,
and the Ten Commandments. Antebellum mistresses' lesson plans relied
upon such staples of protestant doctrine at the expense of other seminal
elements, such as the creation story, Noah and the flood, the exodus
from Egypt, the Sermon on the Mount, and Christ's resurrection. After
the war ex-mistresses painted a different picture, claiming that they
taught widely from both the Old and New Testaments, and they indicated
in several instances that theirs was not a Sunday School. Rather they
provided Christian instruction several days a week.[^31] In particular,
these women remembered long hours teaching about Judgment Day and the
prodigal son. The lesson of Judgment Day was especially powerful and one
that traumatized their slaves. They knew, for example, that bondspeople
had been permanently marked by their witness of the 1833 meteor storm,
an unusually active display of Leonid meteors that could be seen in
Alabama and throughout much of the eastern United States. Many
mistresses thus used it in their presentation of Judgment Day.[^32] As
one Maryland ex-mistress recorded: "In 1833, when the stars fell, all
the Negroes on the plantation were terrified; they hid under beds, in
barn lofts, hay and straw stacks; they thought judgment day had
come."[^33]

In efforts to appear more dedicated and conscientious than was likely
the case, many former mistresses addressed both the content and
frequency of their religious lessons, even citing the exact portions of
the catechisms taught. After reminiscing about her slaves' general
welfare, Victoria V. Clayton of Eufala, Alabama, wrote: "As to their
[slaves'] religious training, every Sunday morning the mothers brought
their little ones to see me. Then I could satisfy myself as to the care
they gave them, whether they had received a bath and suitable clothing
for the holy day."[^34] Shortly after her inspection of her young
slaves, Clayton then waited for "the larger children [to] present
themselves to be taught the Catechism," where she used the "little
*Calvary Catechism*, prepared by Mrs. D. C. Weston."[^35] In her memoir,
Clayton recorded more details about the adult slaves' religious
experiences: "When the evening meal was over my dining room was in
readiness for the reception of all the grown members of the family. They
gathered there and took their respective seats. They were taught the
Creed of the Holy Apostolic Church, the Lord's Prayer, and the Ten
Commandments."[^36] Typically at such religious meetings Clayton also
"read a short sermon to them," sang hymns and closed with the following
prayer to their Heavenly Father:

> Glorious is the blending
>
> Of right affections, climbing or descending
>
> Along a scale of light and life with cares
>
> Alternate[^37]

The degree of Clayton's detail about the Sunday schedule was incredibly
rare in the antebellum diaries. Similarly hymn singing, which was
commonly referenced by ex-mistresses, was never discussed in earlier
diaries. Although some ex-mistresses chose to record the content of
their lessons in great detail, others felt it more important to
emphasize the frequency of their efforts. The latter professed that it
was less important for their slaves to learn about specific biblical
events than it was for them to be reminded on a regular basis that Jesus
should always be close to their hearts.

Although discussed in more detail overall, white southern women in
post-bellum memoirs made few references to any specific biblical
passages shared with their bondspeople. Scholars have consistently shown
that the antebellum white clergy—and by extension slave masters and
mistresses—stressed biblical elements that encouraged slave
subservience.[^38] This conclusion is confirmed in dozens of slave
narratives written before the Civil War. House servant William Wells
Brown wrote that Christian instruction in his home state of Missouri
solely consisted of "teaching the slave that he must never strike a
white man; that God made him for a slave; and that, when whipped, he
must not find fault,—for the Bible says that ‘He that knoweth his
master's will, and doeth not, shall be beaten with many stripes!'"[^39]
Thus it is likely that former plantation mistresses deliberately omitted
discussion of the specific biblical verses they stressed because it
would undermine—or even contradict—their emphasized "genuine" efforts to
evangelize their bondspeople.[^40]

Unfortunately, due to the constraints of the W.P.A. interviewing format,
former slaves did not enjoy the luxury of expounding at length on their
relationships with their former mistresses. Thus, the interviews
revealed more about social interactions than they did about their
specific Christian beliefs. The W.P.A. provided their interviewers with
a set of specific questions for standardization. Interviewers did on
occasion deviate from those prescribed items, but only rarely. These
questions asked for specifics, and, as such, former bondspeople
infrequently expounded upon their personal religious beliefs.
Nonetheless, former slaves discussed their Christian education in some
detail, which often corroborated the content of the memoirs of their
ex-mistresses.

Although most slaves were either illiterate or only semi-literate at the
end of the Civil War, many ex-slaves interviewed by the W.P.A. recalled
their mistresses teaching them rudimentary reading, writing, and
arithmetic, along with religious lessons.[^41] This practice was most
common in the Upper South, especially in Maryland, Virginia, Missouri,
and Kentucky. Mistresses who presided over Upper South plantations and
larger farms often owned considerably fewer bondspeople than those
residing further south. Thus, for those Upper South white plantation
women, the actual task of educating slaves, religiously and secularly,
may have seemed more manageable and less time-consuming due to fewer
numbers. Born in 1851 in Charles County, Maryland, ex-bondsman Charles
Coles disclosed to the W.P.A. many positives of his life in bondage,
including the religious instruction imparted by his Roman Catholic
mistress. He said, in reference to her:

> Mrs. Dorsey conducted regular religious services of the Catholic
> Church on the farm in a chapel erected for that purpose and in which
> the slaves were taught the catechism and many learned how to read and
> write and were assisted by Catholic priests who came to the farm on
> church holidays and on Sundays for the purpose. When a child was born,
> it was baptized by the priest, and given names and they were recorded
> in the Bible. We were taught the rituals of the Catholic Church and
> when any one died, the funeral was conducted by a priest, the corpse
> was buried in the Dorseys' graveyard, a lot of about 1.5 acres,
> surrounded by cedar trees and well cared for. The only difference in
> the graves was that the Dorsey people had marble markers and the
> slaves had plain stones.[^42]

Gladys Robertson, also an Upper South ex-slave born in Montgomery
County, Kentucky, in 1843, corroborated Coles's portrayal: "The darkies
were deeply religious and learned much of the Bible from devout
mistresses who felt it their holy duty to teach these ignorant people
the word of God. They taught us how to read from the holy book."[^43]
And Callie Washington, yet another Upper South ex-slave born about 1858
in Red Fork, Arkansas, praised her ex-mistress's benevolent qualities:
"They \[her owners\] didn't have no children so old Miss took me in the
big house to be her little nigger. Ole Miss tried to learn me to read
and write and count on my fingers. Old Miss, also learned me to say my
prayers. Every night she would go over ‘Our Father' with me till I could
say it by myself."[^44]

Ex-slaves from other regions of the South also remembered receiving
practical and Christian educations from their mistresses. Although fewer
in number than their counterparts in the Upper South, ex-bondspeople
acknowledged the practice more frequently than did their predecessors in
antebellum sources. For example, several W.P.A. interviewees in North
Carolina claimed to have had Moravian owners who combined evangelism
with English grammar and arithmetic. Betty Cofer, born in 1856 in
Wachovia, North Carolina, is one such example. She praised her mistress
for allowing slaves to attend school in a Moravian-constructed log
church, remarking, "my mistress always read the bible to us an' tell us
right an' wrong."[^45] In a few rare cases, the extent of the education
that a slave received from his or her mistress and master was
remarkable. Jimmie Johnson, born in 1847 and who spent his childhood in
Spartanburg, South Carolina, said:

> Masser and Missus were Episcopalians, and I went to Sunday School
> where the rock church now stands (Church of the Advent). Miss Mary
> Legg was my teacher, and she was a saintly woman. She was a niece of
> old Masser. Old Missus used to come to the house where I lived and
> teach me the alphabet. After I got older, I use to take care of the
> Masser's horse and buggy for him; used to hitch-up the horse for him
> and go with him on his way to see a patient. Bless his heart, he let
> me take my Webster's blue back speller and my history with me when I
> would drive with him. I would study those books and Masser would tell
> me how to pronounce the hard words. That is the way I got an
> education. Masser would tell Missus that Jimmie was a smart boy, that
> he had no father nor mother and that they must be good to him. They
> sure was. I never wanted for a thing. Sometimes on our drives Masser
> would tell me some Latin words, but I never did study Latin—just
> English.[^46]

The W.P.A. slave narratives further revealed that, in general, mistress
religious instruction was also more frequently undertaken in the
sparsely populated areas of the South than it was in most areas of the
Deep South. In those more remote locations, plantations were small by
Deep South standards, resulting in significantly smaller holdings of
bondspeople. It was again more manageable for mistresses so inclined to
religiously indoctrinate and generally teach their slaves when the
numbers were relatively small. The infrequent visits of circuit-riding
preachers and the long distances between home and church also help
explain the greater number of mistress-directed religious efforts on the
frontier. B. C. Franklin, the father of renowned historian John Hope
Franklin, was never a slave, but in a 1935 W.P.A. interview he spoke of
his mother who was. She had been owned by a Choctaw and lived in an
isolated area of northeast Mississippi. B. C. Franklin spoke highly of
his mother's benevolent owner who "allowed [his mother] every privilege
of [her] people," and of her devout Choctaw mistress who claimed his
mother as her special "Bible student."[^47] However, in some cases,
frontier mistresses—by virtue of their own literary inadequacies—were
not equipped to be the religious educator of anyone, black or white.

* * * * *

A second theme found among the memoirs published by ex-slaveholding
women includes the common usage of the terms "enlighten" and "civilize,"
as well as variations of them in reference to slave Christian education
and mentoring. To some degree, these authors viewed blacks negatively in
ways that mirrored late nineteenth- and early twentieth-century
scientists who placed Africans at the bottom of the evolutionary
hierarchy. Such women lived during a time when many scientists upheld
the ideologies of both social Darwinism and eugenics. In attempts to
reconcile their slaveholding pasts, ex-slaveholding women reflected
these ideologies. While some female authors may have upheld scientific
racism, more often than not they were rearticulating antebellum defenses
of slavery in the manner of U. B. Phillips.[^48] Nevertheless, in many
cases, these mistresses felt divinely directed to spiritually uplift and
to physically ameliorate the lives of their slaves, hoping that their
efforts brought their bondspeople to God. One must seriously question
whether such ex-mistresses exaggerated, in memory, their significance in
that role. Thus, in proclaiming their earlier dedication—real or
exaggerated—to religious education, it is not surprising that some
ex-mistresses expressed the hope that some of their former slaves would
return to Africa and be prophets for Christianity. Such women further
envisioned their ex-bondspeople promoting and spreading white society's
"enlightened" western values.[^49]

Likewise, African-American post-bellum sources typically characterized
former mistresses as good-intentioned, pious women whose mission it was
to uplift an inferior, supposedly less evolved, race. In particular,
such former slaves recalled their mistress's sincere desire to bring her
slaves to Jesus Christ and to give them, by way of biblical teachings, a
roadmap for a better life. Some indicated that their mistresses had
cruel, disingenuous, and manipulative intentions as religious educators
and in no way exhibited the effects of a higher calling. Another group
of ex-slaves, in their interviews, stated that their mistresses had
never discussed Christianity with them. Still others remembered the
terror imparted to them by their mistresses who threatened them with
eternal damnation in punishment for their misdeeds. As a whole, the
majority of ex-bondspeople identified positive religious experiences
with mistresses. Some of them even expressed affection and gratitude
toward those women, habitually using adjectives like "dutiful,"
"angelic," and "holy."[^50]

Walter Long, born in 1852, remembered his slave days near Columbia,
South Carolina, and his mistress who, by the example of her life and
her own personal deeds, facilitated his life-long relationship with
God. He said: "Mistress was mighty ‘ticular ‘bout our ‘ligion, ‘cause
she knowed dere was no nigger any too good no how. Us slaves ‘sorbed
all de good us had in us from our mistress, I really believes. She was
so kind and gentle, she moved ‘mong us a livin' benediction,
deliverin' us to God."[^51] Other slaves lamented the spiritual
condition of African Americans in the 1930s, regretting that they did
not possess the piety that mistresses had instilled in them during
slavery. Minerva Wells, born about 1853 in Pinola, Mississippi,
recalled that "Now I thinks ‘o de slave days an' ob my Ole Missus, she
sho' wuz a fine, holy purson…. I wishes de young colored folks would
settle down an' think like we wuz by Ole Missus."[^52] At least in
memory by the 1930s, many ex-slaves often held up the plantation
mistress as a positive moral example in part due to her attempts at
Christian instruction.

* * * * *

A third theme in ex-mistress memoirs was the gratitude of their
bondspeople. These memoirs emphasized the high esteem in which slaves
regarded their mistresses because of their religious education.
Correctly or incorrectly, naïvely or not, the memoirs describe former
slaves who believed their mistresses made significant Christian inroads
into their lives. And in most cases there had been general acceptance of
such efforts. Margaret Pollock Devereux of Raleigh, North Carolina,
whose 1906 memoir contained significant discussion of her "other
family," commented, "Despite their superstitions, they are most grateful
for all my teachings."[^53] Some memoirs suggested, perhaps in
artificial attempts to elevate former mistresses, that slaves perceived
them as their personal saviors, sincere spiritual advisors, and
individuals responsible for removing them from the "darkness" and
"degradation" of Africa and into the light of the white Christian world.

Some antebellum-era slaves apparently were so grateful for their
mistresses' sacrifices—propelled by evangelistic zeal—that if provided
the opportunity, they would have chosen to remain with their mistresses
rather than to leave.[^54] Reflecting upon a childhood experience with
one "special" slave, ex-mistress Elizabeth W. Allston Pringle of South
Carolina wrote, "One day she [Maum Maria] sat on the ground weaving a
rug. I was listening to her stories of her home in Africa, and in my
little girl voice said with sympathy: ‘Maum ‘Ria, you must be dreadfully
sorry they took you away from all that, and brought you to a strange
land to work for other people'"[^55] Inserting some of the supposed
literal words of Maum 'Ria, Pringle continued, "Maum Maria stopped her
work, rose to her full height—she was very tall and straight—clasped her
hands and said, dropping a deep courtesy as she spoke: 'My chile, ebery
night on my knees I tank my Hebenly Father that he brought me here, for
without that I wud neber hev known my Savior!'"[^56] Pringle also
reported that although some slaves, Maum Maria included, were afforded
the opportunity for freedom in addition to a "little sum to be given
them yearly," they elected to remain on the plantation. Their decision
was motivated by their love for their mistress and appreciation for the
lives, including the religious instruction, she provided them. Pringle
recorded, "Daddy Tom took his freedom, [and] Daddy Prince and Maum Maria
said they were grateful to their beloved mistress, but they would rather
remain just as they were; they had all they needed and were happy and
loved their white family, and they did not want to make any
change."[^57] According to Pringle, Daddy Prince and especially Maum
Maria were so grateful to their mistress for her sincere role in
introducing Christ to her bondspeople that they gladly continued to live
with their "white family" even when offered their freedom.

Few scholars, if any, would concur with the rosy picture of plantation
life that Pringle described. In *Them Dark Days: Slavery in the American
Rice Swamps*, historian William Dusinberre described the Pringle
plantations, as well as those belonging to their neighbors in coastal
South Carolina and Georgia—the Allstons, Manigaults, and Butlers—as
inhumane "charnel houses" for slaves, adding that for those in
rice-producing areas "slavery was even more horrific than is generally
acknowledged."[^58] Admittedly, Dusinberre did not discuss slave
religious education, but one must question the genuineness of Pringle's
stories of Maum Maria and her choice to remain with Pringle's
family.[^59] It is unlikely that exploited slaves like Maum Maria, who
toiled daily in unhealthy conditions, were as appreciative as Pringle
reported. It is also unlikely that they were recipients of a mistress's
religious instruction and the salvation which it supposedly offered.
However, if in fact Maum Maria did express sentiments of appreciation,
it is probable she did so because she was a "favorite" house slave in a
position very different from her counterparts in the fields. Especially,
in light of the number of slaves on lowcountry plantations, it is
unlikely that large numbers of enslaved people would have been brought
to the Christian faith by their mistresses.

Finally, some ex-mistresses claimed that ex-slaves tried to locate
them—sometimes many years after emancipation—so they could express
gratitude for their religious instruction and moral example. For
instance, Mary Norcott Bryan, the daughter of a North Carolina
plantation mistress, remembered a post-bellum visit from Reuben, a
former family slave. Although the Norcott family "had lost sight of him
during the war," Reuben arrived at Bryan's doorstep to thank Bryan for
her mother's spiritual guidance.[^60] According to Bryan, Reuben
confessed to her that "he had been a very bad man since he was free, and
that he was only then out of the Penitentiary."[^61] Reuben had felt
compelled to confess his sins—and commit himself to a better
future—largely because of his mistress's lasting influence. Supposedly
Bryan's mother had instilled in Reuben Christian values and morals for
which he was eternally grateful. After the Civil War, Reuben had
"thought a great deal about [his] old missus, how she used to read the
Bible and pray for [her slaves], and as she is gone, [he] concluded to
tell [Bryan his] resolution."[^62]

Significantly, antebellum slave narratives did not corroborate the
content of the idealized examples and reminisces recorded in mistresses'
memoirs. Before emancipation former bondspeople and their female owners
consistently recorded that slaves preferred to worship separately and in
different ways from their white owners. Some slaves adhered to elements
of African religions, some slaves embraced elements of Islam, some
slaves fashioned worship that stressed the Old Testament and downplayed
the New Testament emphasized by their evangelical mistresses, and still
many other slaves adopted unique forms which incorporated aspects of
some or all of the above. Significantly, many of those African Americans
who published slave narratives—both before and after the Civil War—like
Maum Maria, had served as house servants. As a genre, slave narratives
were overwhelmingly authored by ex-house servants who, by virtue of the
countless hours spent in and around the Big House, had more intimate
relationships with and knowledge of the mistress. In many cases, this
interaction translated into negative reportage about mistress-directed
slave religious education. Although not numerous, narratives authored by
ex-field slaves who had very different relationships with the mistress
than her house servants, portrayed more negative feelings regarding
white Christianity.[^63]

One can and should be highly skeptical of the claims repeatedly made in
post-bellum memoirs of former slaveholding women that their
ex-bondspeople were appreciative of their mistress's religious education
and mentorship. In particular, it is significant that ex-mistresses
rarely referenced any religious expression within the slave community.
It is highly unlikely that they were completely unaware of the quotidian
activities of the slave community, especially its syncretic religious
culture. Rather, one might assume that former slaveholding women chose
to ignore slaves' religious expression in order to emphasize their own
religious function and status with their bondspeople. Furthermore, it is
conceivable that such ex-mistresses assumed seemingly innocent roles as
chroniclers of their pasts and memories, stories that were written for
the benefit of their ancestors. However, in so doing, such women
embraced active roles as promoters of the complementary myths of the
Lost Cause and the antebellum utopia. Along with their male family
members, former slaveholding women forged alliances with white northern
compatriots, alliances that constructed a shared narrative relative to
the benevolent nature of slavery. The question that remains for another
scholar is the extent to which these elite white women were aware of the
political implications of their memoirs.

Nonetheless, analysis of the thousands of W.P.A. narratives and several
dozen post-bellum African American memoirs and biographies indicates
that the majority of respondents, at least at that point in their lives,
expressed positive opinions and gratitude for the Christian instruction
they received from their mistresses. Very few ex-bondspeople
alluded—either implicitly or explicitly—to attempts to resist or reject
mistress-directed religious instruction. One must remember, however,
that many ex-slaves, by virtue of their age at the end of bondage, would
have been too young to have succeeded in most acts of resistance.
Regardless of their actual relationships with their mistresses, many
ex-slaves within their memoirs or interviews reflected fondly on their
antebellum Sunday school experiences. One such example is South
Carolinian Alexander Bettis, a prominent Baptist minister and educator,
and specifically his biographer Alfred William Nicholson, who credited
Bettis's mistress for identifying his potential as a student and
Christian and for gently guiding him down God's chosen path for him as a
Baptist preacher:

> For by recognizing the lad's [Bettis's] unusual abilities, and by
> allowing her [Bettis's mistress] kind disposition to give expression
> to itself in the giving of special training to him, she was preparing
> thereby a mighty factor for the glory of God through the uplift and
> betterment of the lowly negro, and she was developing, moreover, a
> positive protection to her own people through the gratitude this
> trained negro ever had for his mistress and, because of her, all of
> her class. For when the untutored host of negroes would likely have
> confused the term liberty with license, and been easily influenced to
> believe that ‘might makes right,' it was the thoughtful negro whose
> gratitude, to former master or mistress, caused him to interpose in
> behalf of the white people.[^64]

Nicholson further conveyed the important role that white southerners
could continue to play—in the 1910s—in racial and religious uplift and
the resultant gratitude of the African-American community. Although
Nicholson was born in 1861, his biography of Bettis reflects not only
Bettis's memories but his own memories about the plantation mistress's
role as religious mentor:

> And why, one would be tempted to ask, do not the white people of the
> South today read the negro's gratitude as expressed in his fidelity in
> the hours of temptation during the past, and make sure of his fidelity
> in the ordeals that are yet to come by increasing the occasions for
> his gratitude through and because of justice and increased kindness
> shown in the present? A sane and righteous answer to that question,
> put into vigorous living, would settle for the best good and
> contentment of all the white people and all the negroes each and every
> ill growing out of the question of race. What enabled Christ to say,
> ‘And I, if I be lifted up, will draw all men unto me?' Was it not the
> concern shown for even his enemies, causing him to pray for rather
> than abuse them? Anyway, the principle thus exhibited on the cross and
> the negro's responsiveness to kindness, racially speaking, combine to
> convince even a casual observer that the Southern white people have
> nothing to lose by materially concerning themselves in the negro's
> mental, moral and religious uplift, and general prosperity. The life
> of the subject of this sketch emphatically teaches that fact.[^65]

Corroborating Bettis's sentiments, African-American Methodist preacher
H. M. Hamill believed, or was perhaps indoctrinated to believe, that
former slaves who had received white-imparted Christian education not
only led more honorable lives as freedmen, but also tended to express
appreciation to their former masters and mistresses for decades after
emancipation. As Hamill observed in 1904, "whenever he found a negro
whose education \[came\] not from books and college only, but from the
example and home teaching and training of his white master and mistress,
\[he\] generally \[found\] one who sp\[oke\] the truth, \[was\] honest,
self-respecting and self-restraining, docile and reverent, and always
the friend of the Southern white gentleman and lady."[^66] Again, it is
unknown if this was sincere or if Africans Americans, especially
religious figures like Hamill, were attempting to gain financial support
from southern white churches and charitable organizations by casting
their former owners in a positive light.

However, the relatively rare ex-slave did report his or her desires as a
youth to participate in religious activities that were completely
separate from the white world. Mississippian George Weathersby, born in
1852 in Simpson County, told his W.P.A. interviewer that they "could go
to meeting at de white folks church an' sit in de back, bus us wanted to
have worship in our own way." Rather, on Sundays, Weathersby's slave
community "would collect at some ole' vacant cabin an' have [their]
services. In de summer time [they] would build big brush arbors off in
de woods. At nite [they] would make big firs to see by, then [they]
would sing prayer an' shout all us wanted to."[^67] Notably, in that
same interview Weathersby contradicted himself by saying, "Hit wuz bad
fer us niggers to be enslaved, but us wuz cared for, mos' times a heap
bettern po' folks is a faring these days. Our race has gained
Civilazation an' education by hit so I is satisfied an' wants de good
will on everybody."[^68] Corroborating Weathersby, ex- slave Charles
Hayes, born in 1849 in Clarke County, Alabama, spoke to the vicissitudes
and contradictions of the slave experience: "One who does not know the
south, can form no conception of the extreme hardships some of the
slaves had to undergo; the many peculiar situations that would arise,
nor can he have the faintest idea of the deep regard, and at times, even
real affection that existed between the master and the favored slave."
With a degree of appreciation—real or affected—Hayes concluded that "it
is a reflex for this regard that is the basis of all the helpful things
the better class of southern white people are now doing to help the
Negro better his condition to raise to higher planes of manhood."[^69]

Finally, some ex-slaves who criticized the religious education of
mistresses in their earlier lives revaluated their previous positions by
the 1930s. Such ex-bondspeople voiced regret for not having exhibited
better attitudes toward their mistresses' efforts. South Carolinian
Lincoln Watkins, born about 1850, is such an example. To his W.P.A.
interviewer, Watkins expressed regret saying, "Young Miss tried to teach
me to read and write and gave me lessons in de Bible but I wus too dumb
to learn and didn't have the sense to appreciate it."[^70] Those
African-American men and women interviewed by W.P.A. employees were
typically only teenagers or young children during their lives in
bondage. Such individuals, by virtue of their age, may not have had the
patience or interest in their mistresses' attempts at Christian
instruction. Undoubtedly, though, religion often served as a source of
comfort to African Americans of all ages during the lean years of the
Great Depression. It is thus conceivable that former slaves wished they
had been more receptive to their mistress's earlier efforts to help them
establish relationships with Jesus.

* * * * *

Finally, ex-mistresses frequently discussed their former slaves in much
the same tone as their biological children. In such instances, they were
quick to emphasize that they were responsible and wished to provide
materially and especially spiritually for the needs of their own
children and likewise for their slave children. A few antebellum diaries
describe satisfying relationships with individual slaves, though usually
with either small children or persons assigned to the house. However,
their later memoirs almost universally glorify the mistress-slave
relationship, often in very saccharine ways. Given the content of extant
antebellum sources, one might label ex-mistresses as disingenuous for
their seemingly universal description of relationships with slaves as
loving and familial.

In one such example, ex-mistress Victoria Clayton repeatedly represented
her former plantation and its inhabitants as an Eden where everyone was
one big, happy Christian family. She wrote: "We simply and naturally
understood that our slaves must be treated kindly and cared for
spiritually, and so they were. We felt that we were responsible to God
for our entire household. We regarded slavery in a patriarchal sense. We
were all one family, and, as master and mistress, heads of this family,
we were responsible to God."[^71] In this vein, the authors of several
other post-bellum memoirs claimed that they had always made the
spiritual welfare of their slaves one of their first priorities, as they
likewise did with their natural children.[^72] These women reported to
have experienced great joy when both their slave children and their
biological children developed meaningful relationships with Christ
because of their care and example.

Because both black and white residents of a single plantation were all
of one family, bondspeople, like their white brethren, deserved tender,
loving care, both spiritually and materially. This was the mindset of
many former slaveholding women. Clayton, for example, boasted that her
"dear" mother assessed the health and safety of her slave children as
conscientiously as she did for her own children. Clayton's mother had
reminded her daughter that on "each Sunday morning [before Sunday
School], the slave mothers brought their children to her, the mistress.
She carefully checked the children to satisfy herself that they were
being properly attended to, bathed, and dressed."[^73] In a similar
instance, Susan Dabney Smedes of Raymond, Mississippi, praised her
mother for the love and spiritual devotion she directed toward her
"other children." Smedes wrote: "She tirelessly extended over the whole
plantation. She had a special eye and care for any neglected or
unfortunate or ill-treated Negro child, and would contrive to have such
cases near her."[^74]

Some ex-slaveholding women, in an attempt to convince their readers that
the mistress-slave relationship was genuine and strong, described how
they received calls to come and sit at the bedside of their dying
slaves. Pringle recounted one such incident: "My mother called his name
gently, ‘Pompey.' He opened his eyes and labored breathing; one could
not but see that death was near. He appeared unconscious, with a look of
great pain on his face." According to Pringle, upon her mother's gentle
touch and words, Pompey "opened his eyes and a look of delight replaced
the one of pain. ‘My mistus!' he exclaimed. ‘Yu cum! O, I tu glad! I
tink I bin gwine, widout see you once more.'"[^75]

The Pringles owned hundreds of slaves. It is unknown whether Pompey was
really an object of family affection or only an anonymous field hand.
Thus, the accuracy of this story is open to question. She went further,
however, in her attempt to characterize her mother as a sincere
evangelist who labored on Sunday to impart religion to her slaves.
Describing Sunday activities, Pringle wrote:

> Mamma every Sunday afternoon had all the children big enough to come
> assembled in the little church in the avenue, and taught them what she
> could of the great mercy of God and what He expected of his children.
> It was always spoken of as "katekism," and was the event of the week
> of the children--their best clothes, their cleanest faces, and oh,
> such smiling faces greeted mamma when she arrived at the church! After
> the lesson a big cake was brought in a wheelbarrow by one of the
> house-boys, convoyed by Maum Mary, who cut it with much ceremony, and
> each child went up to the barrow, dropped a courtesy and received a
> slice, then passed to my mother which another courtesy, filed out and
> scampered happily home as soon as safe from Maum Mary's paralyzing
> eye. All her life mamma kept this up, and in later years we children
> were allowed to go on condition that we should sit still and listen to
> the catechism, and ask for no cake until every child had had his
> share. Then we were allowed a few scraps, which tasted nicer than any
> other cake.[^76]

Assuming that Pringle represented reality, it does appear that her
mother made a sincere attempt to treat her bondspeople similarly to her
children. Additionally, in opposition to common antebellum practice,
when mistresses and clergy segregated blacks from whites in order to
emphasize the concept of subservience, Pringle's mother imparted her
religious education to a racially-mixed audience. She believed that the
message of Jesus should belong equally to all persons. Once again,
however, one must call into question Pringle's portrayal of plantation
religious education, especially when rationalized with extant knowledge
of the Pringle plantation and others like it in lowland South Carolina.
Perhaps she slid into that comfortable revisionist history trap in order
to earn a place for herself among many of the elite white authors that
the South produced late in the nineteenth century.

Relatedly, ex-bondspeople revealed that mistresses played a crucial
personal, even familial, role in their own religious experiences. This
included the mistress's participation in some of their slaves' most
important personal and spiritual rites of passage, especially baptisms
and funerals. Through their revelations, ex-bondspeople suggest not only
that their mistresses assumed vital supportive and familial positions in
their lives, but that their religious relationship was not confined to
the weekly Sunday school lesson. For example, many ex-bondspeople
remembered their mistress-directed education specifically emphasizing
John the Baptist and his baptism of Jesus Christ. Consequently,
ex-slaves described the emotional significance of plantation baptisms in
their lives. The degree to which ex-slaves discussed this topic varied,
but Esther Lockhart, for example, expounded at length about her special
day. Lockhart, born around 1850 in Spartanburg, South Carolina,
recalled: "All Saturday I prayed and Miss Bessie told me what I was
going to do [the next afternoon], and read to me from the Bible about
baptizing and about John the Baptist baptizing Christ. Yes sir, the
Bible say Christ went down in the water, in the waters of Jordan."
Further remembered by Lockhart was that her mistress had kindly advised
her ma "how to fix [her] clothes while [Miss Bessie] was reading the
Bible to me." As for special baptizing attire, Lockhart informed her
W.P.A. interviewer that "all [of her] clothes was white but [her] shoes"
because "in those day they did not have white shoes." On that next
afternoon, "the sun was good and hot," and Lockhart "had a white dress
to wear to the pond and … two pairs of white stockings." Lockhart warmly
remembered that her family and the slave community were with her at this
rite of passage and that "Miss Bessie ... and all the white folks went
to see their Negroes go under."[^77]

Apparently, mistresses' interest in slave baptism was not entirely
confined to smaller plantations where white women arguably had more
personal relationships with their bondspeople. Jane Sutton, born in 1853
in Harrison County, Mississippi, on a large plantation containing
several hundred slaves, remembered her mistress's attention in obtaining
special Baptismal clothing: "My white folks wuz all Baptis' and dey made
us go to church too. De church wuz called de ‘Strong River Church.' Dey
had big babtizing. I 'members when I jined de church and wuz baptized.
De white folks preacher baptized uz in de creek whut run from Mr.
Berry's pond." Sutton "wuz drest in a white 'lowel' slip made outer
cloth we spin and weave" and in her Sunday "caliker dresses." Fondly
recalling that day, Sutton told her that her baptismal attire "dat old
mistus go fer my granny … sho wuz purty. It wuz white and yaller, and it
wuz de purtiest thing I thought I ever saw."[^78]

Ex-slaves also noted their mistresses' roles at slave funerals, although
white female attendance at such events appeared less common than at
baptisms. In selected instances, not only did mistresses attend, but
they also delivered the eulogies. The accuracy of memories that recalled
a mistress's presence more frequently at baptisms than at funerals is
uncertain, but this can possibly be explained by the significance of a
slave's baptism as a rite of passage. This selectivity of ex-slave
memories can also be supported by the fact the ages of slaves at the
time of such funerals; they were young enough that they hypothetically
may not have processed many of the funeral details.

Still other ex-bondspeople acknowledged that they felt it was their
Christian duty to remain with their mistress at the end of her life
because of their close familial relationships. North Carolinian William
Henry Singleton reflected upon the death of his mistress, who he
described as "not lik[ing] the idea of owning slaves" and as a "good
Christian woman" who had taught her slaves "that the Bible did not teach
that it was right to own slaves." Recounting the slave community's
response to their mistress's death, Singleton recalled that, "On the day
of the funeral all of us slaves on the plantation, between seventy-five
and a hundred, men, women and children, followed her body to the
cemetery, about five miles away, where she was buried." According to
Singleton, his mistress's death "was a very sad occasion, for all the
women were crying and most of the men too, as well as the children. We
knew that she was the best friend we had and that now our lot would be
harder."[^79]

Finally, some former slaves remembered special times when their
mistresses dedicated their own lives to Christ and were inspired to do
so by a devout bondsperson. Post-bellum evangelist Amanda Berry Smith
recalled in her autobiography the role her own mother had played in "the
wonderful conversion" of her mother's young mistress, Miss Celie, just
outside of Baltimore. In particular, Smith—who was a young child at the
time—remembered her mother accompanying her young mistress to a
Methodist camp meeting and reveling in how "the spirit of the Lord [had]
got hold of [her] young mistress." According to Smith, her mother had
undergone her own conversion experience just two years before this, but
had vigorously prayed for Miss Celie within that time. Smith also
revealed that her mother's "heart was bounding with gladness when Miss
Celie was converted." Overcome by her conversion, the young mistress
expressed a desire to attend African-American religious services and
learn to pray in a highly emotional manner, reminiscent of the style
exhibited by her bondspeople.[^80] Here, Smith's memories lead readers
to contemplate a religious world that whites and blacks made together.

* * * * *

Post-bellum white and black sources reveal memories of a favorable and
heartfelt mistress-slave relationship. Ex-slaveholding women portrayed
their roles as religious educators and mentors more positively in their
post-bellum memoirs than they did in their antebellum diaries. Likewise
ex-bondspeople remembered their religious experiences with their
ex-mistresses more positively in post-bellum sources than they did in
pre-Civil War book-length narratives. This being said, it is essential
for those who research these documents to proceed with caution when
making generalizations based upon them. One can fault ex-slaveholding
women for representing themselves as more pure and high-minded than they
appeared in their antebellum diaries. Likewise, one can question the
recollections of ex-slaves who were probably also guilty of consciously
(mis)remembering their slave experiences.

Nonetheless, despite their flaws, these sources are valuable because
they shed light on the complexities and politics of memory. In fact,
these post-bellum memories reveal almost as much about southern religion
and race relations at their time of publication as they do about the
antebellum South. They demonstrate that both white and black populations
continued to embrace and promote evangelical Christianity as an ideal.
Perhaps more importantly, these post-bellum memories also confirm that
whites continued to control the master narrative. Meanwhile, stemming
from the complementary realties of racism and deference, African
Americans felt compelled to affirm the saccharine and sentimental master
narrative of white southerners. In accounting for the politics of
memory, we are one step closer to understanding *why* similar, often
converging black and white post-bellum narratives concealed different
social realities.

[^1]: George P. Rawick, ed., *The American Slave: A Composite
    Autobiography, vol. 2, parts 1 and 2* (Westport, Conn.: Greenwood
    Press, 1972), Part 2, 331.

[^2]: Ibid., 334.

[^3]: Ibid., 338.

[^4]: Ibid., 338–39.

[^5]: Ibid., 339.

[^6]: Ibid., 340.

[^7]: Ibid.

[^8]: See Catherine Clinton, *The Plantation Mistress: Woman's World in
    the Old South* (New York: Pantheon Books, 1982); Drew Gilpin Faust,
    *Mothers of Invention: Women of the Slaveholding South in the
    American Civil War* (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press,
    2004); Elizabeth Fox-Genovese, *Within the Plantation Household:
    Black and White Women of the Old South* (Chapel Hill: University of
    North Carolina Press, 1988); Thavolia Glymph, *Out of the House of
    Bondage: The Transformation of the Plantation Household* (New York:
    Cambridge University Press, 2008); Minrose Gwin, *Black and White
    Women of the Old South: The Peculiar Sisterhood in American
    Literature* (Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press, 1985); Anne
    Firor Scott, *The Southern Lady: From Pedestal to Politics, 1830–1930*
    (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1970); Brenda E. Stevenson,
    *Life in Black and White: Family and Community in the Slave South*
    (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1997); Marli Weiner, *Mistresses
    and Slaves: Plantation Women in South Carolina, 1830–1880*
    (Champaign: University of Illinois Press, 1997); and Deborah Gray
    White, *Ar'n't I a Woman: Female Slaves in the Old South* (New York:
    Norton, 1999).

[^9]: This is not to suggest that there were not extant antebellum
    sources that presented slavery, specifically slave missions, in
    idealized terms. To the contrary, white southerners produced
    innumerable sources in an effort to defend the institution. For
    example, denominational literature—including advice literature,
    formal resolutions, and catechisms—portrayed slave missions in
    paternalistic ways.

[^10]: Such antebellum African-American sources include slave narratives
    and black newspapers. See William Wells Brown, *Narrative of the Life
    of William W. Brown, A Fugitive Slave* (Boston: Anti-Slavery Society
    Office, 1848), Lewis and Milton Clarke, *Narratives of the Sufferings
    of Lewis and Milton Clarke, Sons of a Soldier of the Revolution,
    During a Captivity of More than Twenty Years Among the Slaveholders
    of Kentucky, One of the So Called Christian States of North America.
    Dictated by Themselves* (Boston: Published by Bela Marsh, 1846) and
    Harriet Ann Jacobs, *Incidents in the Life of a Slave Girl, Written
    by Herself*, ed. Jean Fagin Yellin (1861; New York: Harcourt Brace
    Company, 1973). See also John B. Boles, ed., *Masters and Slaves in
    the House of the Lord: Race and Religion in the American South,
    1740–1870* (Lexington: University Press of Kentucky, 1988).

[^11]: See Janet Duitsman Cornelius, *Slave Missions and the Black Church
    in the Antebellum South* (Columbia: University of South Carolina
    Press, 1999); Alonzo Johnson and Paul Jersild, eds., *"Ain't Gonna
    Lay My ‘Ligion Down": African American Religion in the South*
    (Columbia: University of South Carolina Press, 1996); Albert J.
    Raboteau, *Slave Religion: The "Invisible Institution" in the
    Antebellum South* (New York: Oxford University Press, 1978); and
    Milton C. Sernett, *Black Religion and American Evangelicalism: White
    Protestants, Plantation Missions and the Flowering of Negro
    Christianity, 1787–1865* (Metuchen, N.J.: Scarecrow Press, 1975).
    Nonetheless, not all scholars accept this characterization of slave
    religious life. For example, Charles F. Irons argues that
    significant interaction between black and white Virginians existed
    relative to the development of evangelical Christianity in the
    antebellum South. See Charles F. Irons, *The Origins of Proslavery
    Christianity: White and Black Evangelicals in Colonial and
    Antebellum Virginia* (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina
    Press, 2008).

[^12]: These post-bellum sources are of tantamount importance for what
    they reveal about the post-war psychology of plantation mistresses
    regarding their antebellum roles. Historians should not disregard
    this collection of documents just because it is relatively small in
    number, significantly smaller in number than the known array of
    antebellum diaries. Researchers should remember that some proper
    Victorian ladies believed it not socially appropriate for their
    names to appear in print. This mentality partially accounts for the
    paucity of known post-Civil War memoirs.

[^13]: See David W. Blight, *Race and Reunion: The Civil War in American
    Memory* (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2001); W.
    Fitzhugh Brundage, *The Southern Past: A Clash in Race and Memory*
    (Cambridge, Mass.: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 2008);
    Kathleen Ann Clark, *Defining Moments: African American Commemoration
    and Political Culture in the South, 1865–1913* (Chapel Hill:
    University of North Carolina Press, 2005); Gaines Foster, *Ghosts of
    the Confederacy: Defeat, the Lost Cause and the Emergence of the New
    South, 1865–1913* (New York: Oxford University Press, 1988); Sarah E.
    Gardner, *Blood & Irony: Southern White Women's Narratives of the
    Civil War, 1861–1937* (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina
    Press, 2004); and Nina Silber, *The Romance of Reunion: Northerners
    and the South, 1865–1900* (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina
    Press, 1997). Among the most influential and prolific members in
    this group is David Blight, who has argued that white Americans from
    both the North and South redefined their understanding of the causes
    and meanings of the Civil War as they attempted to reconstruct the
    nation. In particular, for Blight, the causes of the war were
    alternately the preservation of the Union or of slavery, and its
    most important legacy was emancipation. This interpretation,
    however, was largely rejected during the post-bellum era by whites
    because it derailed the road to white national reconciliation and
    renewal—a theme also articulated by Nina Silber. Rather, according
    to Gaines Foster, and later adopted by Blight, between 1865 and
    1915, the Civil War was reduced to chivalrous recollections, the
    essential meaning of the war was practically forgotten, and
    complementary myths of the Lost Cause and the antebellum utopia had
    been successfully constructed by the South. These scholars further
    contend that white northerners and southerners alike allied relative
    to shared memories of slavery as a benevolent institution, the Civil
    War as a tragic misunderstanding, Reconstruction as a failure, the
    Ku Klux Klan as a necessary institution to uphold enlightened
    civilization, and Jim Crow laws as a justifiable and paternalistic
    means to uplift African Americans—all in the name of white
    interregional reconciliation.

[^14]: According to Blight and Brundage, some African Americans,
    including Douglass and Garnett, vehemently rejected this version of
    southern history manufactured by powerful whites. Kathleen Clark, in
    particular, argues that black commemorative traditions—including
    Emancipation Day and Fourth of July ceremonies—served as
    opportunities for African Americans to assert their own
    understandings of the antebellum South and slavery, the Civil War,
    and Emancipation. See Blight, *Race and Reunion*; and Brundage, *The
    Southern Past*.

[^15]: David Blight, Fitzhugh Brundage and Kathleen Clark are among
    those scholars who focus on historical memory difference.

[^16]: See Karen L. Cox, *Dixie's Daughters: The United Daughters of the
    Confederacy and the Preservation of Confederate Culture*
    (Gainesville: University Press of Florida, 2003).

[^17]: Gardner, *Blood & Irony*.

[^18]: Although one may reasonably assume that former slaveholding women
    purposely remembered their lives as mistresses in idealized terms,
    one cannot assume that their writings are consciously created or
    largely fabricated. In other words, just as historians of memory
    point out the constructed nature of historical narratives, they
    cannot (reasonably) assume that such sources are not true.

[^19]: Note: I was unable to find a single slaveholding woman who
    produced both a pre-emancipation diary and a post-bellum memoir.
    This is not to say that there were no such women, but it would
    appear as if there is no publically accessible pre-1865 diary
    written by a woman who published a post-bellum memoir. It would have
    been very revealing had I been able to identify such women.

[^20]: See Ulrich Bonnell Phillips, *American Negro Slavery: A Survey of
    the Supply, Employment, and Control of Negro Labor, as Determined by
    the Plantation Regime* (New York: D. Appleton and Company, 1918).

[^21]: Elizabeth W. Allston Pringle, *Chronicles of Chicora Wood* (New
    York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1922), 77. Historian William Kauffman
    Scarborough provides further analysis and contextualization of
    Allston female responsibilities and duties with regards to their
    bondspeople. See William Kauffman Scarborough, *The Allstons of
    Chicora Wood: Wealth, Honor, and Gentility in the South Carolina
    Lowcountry* (Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 2011).

[^22]: Virginia Ingraham Burr, ed., *The Secret Eye: The Journal of Ella
    Gertrude Clanton Thomas, 1848–1889* (Chapel Hill: University of North
    Carolina Press, 1990), 276–77.

[^23]: Such assumptions, original to me (the author), were inspired by
    those scholars who have examined the lives and psychologies of
    post-bellum elite white southern women. See Cox, *Dixie's Daughter*;
    Jane Turner Censer, *The Reconstruction of White Southern Womanhood,
    1865–1895* (Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 2003);
    Gardner, *Blood & Irony*; and Scott, *The Southern Lady*. Censer, in
    particular, explores those reasons why elite, white, southern women
    embraced roles as writers. Censer's focus, however, is upon southern
    white women who published fiction, not memoirs. Nonetheless, Censer
    touches upon themes similar to the ones I identify relative to
    women's memories of Christian instruction of slaves.

[^24]: According to Paul Escott, there were some efforts in
    standardizing the W.P.A. interviews. In particular, the national
    director of the Federal Writers' Project, Henry G. Alsberg,
    dispatched a memorandum containing several suggestions and a list of
    twenty categories of sample questions. Alsberg's sample questions,
    which were meant only as starting points, covered three broad areas:
    1) conditions of life in slavery (including religion, food, work,
    clothing, resistance, care of the sick, and relationships with
    owners), 2) lives during the Civil War and Reconstruction, and 3)
    lives in more contemporary times. Paul D. Escott, *Slavery
    Remembered: A Record of Twentieth-Century Slave Narratives* (Chapel
    Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1979).

[^25]: Particularly significant is that fact that those subjects at the
    time of their interviews were at a minimum of 80 years old. The vast
    majority of interviewed ex-slaves were born between 1845 and 1860, a
    period by which most slaves had been Christianized. An ex-slave born
    in 1845 hypothetically could have been interviewed as late as 1937
    at which time he could have been 92 years old. Factoring in the
    harsh reality of compromised life expectancy for African Americans
    in the 1930s, very few of the W.P.A. subjects would have been born
    any earlier than 1845. The testimonies of interviewees born before
    1845 are subject to question. Acknowledging that most interviewees
    were in fact born between 1845 and 1860, a large percentage of them
    would have been children or very young teenagers during their period
    of bondage. This assertion does not to imply that the lives of slave
    youth were easy; certainly there were many physical, material, and
    psychological discomforts. However, in contrast to the lives of
    older teenagers and adults, those existences of children were
    usually less difficult. As a group, children experienced fewer
    rapes, less frequent sexual harassment, certainly less pregnancy,
    fewer beatings, and joined in less arduous physical work.
    Considering these factors, as a group, those ex-slaves interviewed
    by the W.P.A., African Americans who were at least 80 years old, in
    reality may have reported a more tolerable experience in slavery
    because, by virtue of their age, they did have a more tolerable
    experience. A small number of those persons interviewed claimed ages
    between 90 and 100, making them born between the mid-1830s and the
    mid-1840s. Their testimony was especially valuable because, unlike
    so many of the other interviewees, these ex-slaves had lived in
    bondage as young adults. By consequence, they would have experienced
    more of the realities, particularly the negative realities, of the
    slave experience than the bulk of the W.P.A. subjects. Regrettably,
    some of the responses of the excessively elderly were sometimes
    compromised either because of their incoherence due to dementia, or
    their inability to recall many details from so long in the past.
    Thus, it is the interviews taken from persons born in that 15 year
    window (1845–1860) which comprise the most usable portion of the
    W.P.A. collection. See Escott, *Slavery Remembered*. On the 1930s
    African-American experience in the South, see Kenneth J. Bindas,
    *Remembering the Great Depression in the Rural South* (Gainesville:
    University Press of Florida, 2009); Douglas A. Blackmon, *Slavery by
    Another Name: The Re-Enslavement of Black Americans from the Civil
    War to World War II* (New York: Doubleday, 2008); James C. Cobb, *The
    Most Southern Place on Earth: The Mississippi Delta and the Roots of
    Regional Identity* (New York: Oxford University Press, 1992); Robin
    D. G. Kelley, *Hammer and Hoe: Alabama Communists During the Great
    Depression* (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1990);
    and Jay R. Mandle, *Not Slave, Not Free: The African American
    Economic Experience Since the Civil War* (Durham: Duke University
    Press, 1992).

[^26]: Other scholars have made similar arguments. See Ira Berlin, Marc
    Favreau, and Steven F. Millers, eds., *Remembering Slavery: African
    Americans Talk About Their Personal Experiences of Slavery and
    Freedom* (New York: The New Press, 1998); and Escott, *Slavery
    Remembered*.

[^27]: James C. Scott explores the ways by which subordinate or
    subaltern peoples resist authority. More specifically, Scott
    provides scholars with a theoretical approach to read, interpret,
    and ultimately appreciate the words or actions of subordinate
    individuals, for example, ex-slaves. He assigns the term *public
    transcript* to describe the open, public interactions between
    dominators and oppressed and the term *hidden transcript* for the
    critique of power that goes on "offstage," about which those in
    power are typically clueless. Thus, in order to study the systems of
    domination and the voices of subordinates, Scott maintains that
    scholars must pay careful attention to what lies beneath the surface
    of evident, public behavior. According to Scott, those who are
    oppressed typically accept their domination *in public*—perhaps out of
    fear if nothing else—but they will far more openly question their
    domination offstage. If one accepts Scott's theoretical framework
    and applies it to the ex-slaves considered in this article, one
    realizes that it is essential not to accept the ex-slave testimony
    at face value. More concretely, an ex-slave—who might gain
    employment or other financial assistance via their white W.P.A.
    interviewer—will present a gentler, less acrimonious version of
    his/her life in bondage than may have been reality. I thus take
    caution when using such sources. James C. Scott, *Domination and the
    Arts of Resistance: Hidden Transcripts* (New Haven: Yale University
    Press, 1990).

[^28]: Escott, *Slavery Remembered*, 7–8.

[^29]: See Hamp Simmons (born in Pontotoc County, Mississippi in about
    1854) in George P. Rawick, ed., *The American Slave: A Composite
    Autobiography, Vol. 5* (Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press, 1979),
    1938; Malindy Smith (born in Webster County, Mississippi in 1860) in
    Rawick, ed., *The American Slave, Vol. 5*, 1994; and Alice Alexander (born in Jackson Parrish,
    Louisiana in 1831) in Rawick, ed., *The American Slave, Vol. 12*
    (Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press, 1979).

[^30]: Elizabeth Craven, in her study of the relationship between
    plantation mistress and slave, surveyed both the nineteenth-century
    slave narratives—of which there were several dozen—and the
    twentieth-century W.P.A. interviews of ex-bondspeople—of which there
    were several thousand. She found that 75 percent of slaves who wrote
    nineteenth-century narratives discussed, at least at some length,
    the mistress. In the twentieth-century interviews, by contrast, only
    40 percent of ex-slaves referenced her, and some only in passing. Of
    the W.P.A. documents, 65 percent of references to the mistress were
    positive and 35 percent were negative. Among the positive responses,
    55 percent of them elicited were from males and 45 percent of them
    elicited were from females. Note: Elizabeth Craven's manuscript, as
    far as can be ascertained, was never published. Catherine Clinton
    cited Elizabeth Craven's study in *The Plantation Mistress*, 188.

[^31]: Although most southern states passed anti-literacy laws, these
    were difficult to enforce. In some instances, both for practical
    reasons and benevolence, members of some white families taught
    favored slaves rudimentary reading, writing, and arithmetic.

[^32]: John C. Hall, "When Stars Fell on Alabama," *Alabama Heritage* 55
    (Winter 2000): 16–23.

[^33]: Edmund K. Goldsborough, *Ole Mars An' Ole Miss* (1900; Freeport,
    N.Y.: Books for Libraries Press, 1972), 77.

[^34]: Victoria V. Clayton, *White and Black under the Old Regime*
    (Milwaukee: The Young Churchman Co., 1899), 58.

[^35]: Ibid.,

[^36]: Ibid.,

[^37]: Ibid., 58–59.

[^38]: See Boles, ed., *Masters and Slaves in the House of the Lord*;
    Christine Leigh Heyrman, *Southern Cross: The Beginnings of the Bible
    Belt* (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1997);
    Johnson and Jersild, eds., *"Ain't Gonna Lay My "'Ligion Down"*; and
    Raboteau, *Slave Religion*.

[^39]: Brown, *Narrative of the Life of William W. Brown*, 83.

[^40]: An important frustration related to the plantation mistress
    sources was the fact that mistresses, in both their pre- and
    post-Civil War writings, were typically vague when they discussed
    those particular aspects of Christianity which they imparted to
    their slaves. Evidence revealed that mistresses commonly based their
    curriculum on the Ten Commandments, Apostles' Creed, Lord's Prayer,
    the 23rd Psalm and a handful of other old standbys. However,
    mistresses cite few other specific biblical passages in their
    accounts.

[^41]: There were statutes that prohibited teaching enslaved and/or free
    blacks in the following states: Alabama, Georgia, Louisiana,
    Mississippi, Missouri, North Carolina, South Carolina, and Virginia.
    See Heather Andrea Williams, *Self-Taught: African American Education
    in Slavery and Freedom* (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina
    Press, 2005).

[^42]: George P. Rawick, ed., *The American Slave: A Composite
    Autobiography, Vol. 16* (Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press, 1972),
    4–5.

[^43]: Ibid., 85.

[^44]: George P. Rawick, ed., *The American Slave: A Composite
    Autobiography, Supplement Series 2., Vol. 1* (Westport, Conn.:
    Greenwood Press, 1979), 2186, 2188.

[^45]: George P. Rawick,, ed., *The American Slave: A Composite
    Autobiography: Supplement Series 1, Vol. 11* (Westport, Conn.:
    Greenwood Press, 1977), 19

[^46]: George P. Rawick, ed., *The American Slave: A Composite
    Autobiography, Vol. 3* (Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press, 1972), 53.

[^47]: George P. Rawick, ed., *The American Slave: A Composite
    Autobiography: Supplement, Series 1, Vol. 12* (Westport, Conn.:
    Greenwood Press, 1977), 130.

[^48]: Although "benign" and paternalistic, Phillips was nonetheless a
    racist who acknowledged the biological and cultural inferiority of
    African Americans. As such, he praised slaveholders for their role
    relative to the advancement, especially moral advancement, of their
    bondspeople. To Phillips, slavery was a labor system molded by
    mutual concessions, and understandings that ultimately produced
    reciprocal codes of conventional morality and responsibility.
    Nonetheless, some historians have argued that Phillips moved away
    from strictly racist doctrines as he gradually accepted the new
    anthropological and biological research of the 1920s. Phillips,
    *American Negro Slavery*.

[^49]: A significant group of African Americans in the antebellum days,
    Reconstruction era, and particularly in the years after that, who
    advanced the idea that newly freed blacks should return to Africa as
    opposed to remaining in the United States, commonly argued that a
    primary mission upon arrival in Africa was to bring civilization to
    that continent. Most significantly, in 1858, prominent abolitionist
    Henry Highland Garnet founded the African Civilization Society
    (AfCS) which stressed such ideas. See Kenneth C. Barnes, *Journey of
    Hope: The Back-to-Africa Movement in Arkansas in the Late 1800s*
    (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2004); and Martin
    B. Pasternak, *Rise Now and Fly to Arms: The Life of Henry Highland
    Garnet*(New York: Garland Pub., 1995). Former slaveholding women who
    expressed interest in former slaves embracing missionary roles in
    Africa include Letitia M. Burwell, *A Girl's Life in Virginia Before
    the War* (New York: Frederick A. Stokes Company, 1895); and Nancy
    Bostwick DeSaussure, *Old Plantation Days: Being Recollections of
    Southern Life Before the Civil War* (New York: Duffield & Company,
    1909).

[^50]: See Octavia V. Rogers Albert, *The House of Bondage, or, Charlotte
    Brooks and Other Slaves, Original and Life Like, As They Appeared in
    Their Old Plantation and City Slave Life; Together with Pen-Pictures
    of the Peculiar Institution, with Sights and Insights into Their New
    Relations as Freedmen, Freemen, and Citizens* (New York: Hunt &
    Eaton, 1890); Nina Hill Robinson, *Aunt Dice: The Story of a Faithful
    Slave* (Nashville, Tenn.: Publishing House of the M. E. Church South,
    1897); Alfred William Nicholson, *Brief Sketch of the Life and Labors
    of Rev. Alexander Bettis. Also an Account of the Founding and
    Development of the Bettis Academy* (Trenton, S.C.: Published by the
    Author, 1916); and Amanda Smith, *An Autobiography. The Story of the
    Lord's Dealings with Mrs. Amanda Smith the Colored Evangelist;
    Containing an Account of Her Life Work of Faith, and Her Travels in
    America, England, Ireland, Scotland, India, and Africa, As an
    Independent Missionary* (Chicago: Meyer & Brother, 1893).

[^51]: Rawick, ed., *The American Slave: A Composite Autobiography, Vol.
    3*, 119.

[^52]: George P. Rawick, ed., *The American Slave: A Composite
    Autobiography: Supplement, Series I, Vol. 10* (Westport, Conn.:
    Greenwood Press, 1977), 2261.

[^53]: Margaret Devereux, *Plantation Sketches* (Cambridge, Mass.:
    Riverside Press, 1906), 47.

[^54]: Pringle, *Chronicles of Chicora Wood*, 48.

[^55]: Ibid., 54. This quotation was allegedly spoken to a child. I have
    no way of knowing if Maum Maria softened her reply because she was
    speaking to a non-adult, one who was white. I also have no way of
    knowing the degree of accuracy by which Pringle remembered this
    encounter.

[^56]: Ibid., 54. It is again impossible for me to know the source of
    Maum Maria's religious instruction. Pringle implies in her memoir as
    a whole that slave religious instruction emanated from her family
    home.

[^57]: Ibid., 55.

[^58]: William Dusinberre, *Them Dark Days: Slavery in the American Rice
    Swamps* (New York: Oxford University Press, 1996), viii.

[^59]: Dusinberre does, in fact, rely on the mistresses' own words,
    albeit their sources from the antebellum years. The author draws
    heavily upon observations made by Fanny Kemble, Pierce Butler's
    famous and oft-cited wife. Dusinberre reports that Kemble was
    especially affected by the tragedies and tribulations of her
    husband's female slaves whom she witnessed suffering multiple
    miscarriages, excessive mortality among their children, and serious,
    if not fatal, health problems, all of which, it can be argued,
    related to the rigors of their labor. Again, one must carefully
    consider to what extent Pringle "revised" her memories for her
    memoir.

[^60]: Mary Norcott Bryan, *A Grandmother's Recollection of Dixie* (New
    Bern, N.C.: Owen G. Dunn, [1912?]), 15.

[^61]: Ibid., 15.

[^62]: Ibid., 16.

[^63]: Berlin, Favreau, and Millers, eds., *Remembering Slavery*. For
    examples of antebellum slave narratives—written by both ex-house
    slaves ex-field slaves—that portray white Christianity negatively,
    see William J. Anderson, *Life and Narrative of William J. Anderson,
    Twenty-four Years a Slave; Sold Eight Times! In Jail Sixty Times!!
    Whipped Three Hundred Times!!! or The Dark Deeds of American Slavery
    Revealed. Containing Scriptural Views of the Origin of the Black and
    of the White Man. Also, a Simple and Easy Plan to Abolish Slavery in
    the United States. Together with an Account of the Services of
    Colored Men in the Revolutionary War--Day and Date, and Interesting
    Facts* (Chicago: Daily Tribune Book and Job Printing Office, 1857);
    Leonard Black, *The Life and Sufferings of Leonard Black: A Fugitive
    from Slavery* (New Bedford: Press of Benjamin Lindsey, 1847); Brown,
    *Narrative of the Life of William W. Brown*, William and Ellen Craft,
    *Running a Thousand Miles for Freedom; Or, the Escape of William and
    Ellen Craft from Slavery* (London: William Tweedie, 1860); Jacobs,
    *Incidents in the Life of a Slave Girl, Written by Herself*; and
    Lunsford Lane, *The Narrative of Lunsford Lane, Formerly of Raleigh,,
    N.C. Embracing an Account of His Early Life, the Redemption by
    Purchase of Himself and Family from Slavery, and His Banishment from
    the Place of His Birth for the Crime of Wearing a Colored Skin.
    Published by Himself.* (Boston: J.G. Torrey, Printer, 1842).

[^64]: Nicholson, *Brief Sketch of the Life and Labors of Rev. Alexander
    Bettis*, 7.

[^65]: Ibid., 10–12.

[^66]: H. M. Hamill, D.D., *The Old South, A Monograph* (Dallas, Texas:
    Smith & Lamar, 1904), 32.

[^67]: Rawick, ed., *The American Slave: A Composite Autobiography:
    Supplement, Series I, Vol. 10*, 2233

[^68]: Ibid., 2235.

[^69]: Rawick, ed., *The American Slave: A Composite Autobiography:
    Supplement, Series 2, Vol. 1*, 38.

[^70]: Rawick, ed., *The American Slave: A Composite Autobiography, Vol.
    3*, 2210.

[^71]: Clayton, *White and Black under the Old Regime*, 57.

[^72]: Burwell, *A Girl's Life in Virginia Before the War*, 43–46;
    DeSaussure, *Old Plantation Days*, 29–36; Mrs. Burton Harrison,
    *Recollections Grave and Gay* (New York: Charles Scribner's and Sons,
    1911), 143–44.

[^73]: Ibid., 59–60.

[^74]: Ibid., 95.

[^75]: Pringle, *Chronicles of Chicora Wood*, 64.

[^76]: Ibid., 92.

[^77]: Rawick, ed., *The American Slave: A Composite Autobiography, Vol.
    3*, 108.

[^78]: Rawick, ed., *The American Slave: A Composite Autobiography:
    Supplement, Series I, Vol. 10*, 2087.

[^79]: William Henry Singleton, *Recollections of My Slavery Days*
    (Peekskill, N.Y.: Highland Democrat, 1922), 6.

[^80]: Smith, *An Autobiography*, 19–21.
