---
layout: article
title: "Review: Jim Crow's Counterculture"
author-first: Tobin Miller
author-last: Shearer
author: Tobin Miller Shearer
author-note: "Tobin Miller Shearer is an assistant professor of History at University of Montana."
vol: 15
year: 2013
book-reviewed: "R. A. Lawson. <em>Jim Crow's Counterculture: The Blues and Black Southerners 1890-1945</em>. Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 2010. 304 pp. ISBN 978-0-8071-5227-0."
---

The field of cultural history has at times suffered from the burden of
theory. In a bid to interpret costume, mores, food, or, as in this case,
blues music, cultural historians have immersed themselves in
postmodernism, poststructuralism, and the attendant complexities of
prose that so often arise from these pursuits. R. A. Lawson, however,
demonstrates how to make cultural history relevant, meaningful, and
historically pertinent without encumbering the text with jargon-laced
rhetoric. Moreover, his deep knowledge, sharp analysis, and rigorous
contextualization of sources expand our understanding of
African-American responses to institutionalized segregation, violence,
and the ongoing legacies of white supremacy during the first half of the
twentieth century.

In this sophisticated study of the blues in black southern culture
between 1890 and 1945, Lawson contends that blues musicians fostered a
flexible and durable counterculture that allowed African Americans to
both resist and accommodate racism in the South and North. He traces the
shift in blues music from pre-World War II *me-centered* themes---which
he calls a "lonely sort of democratic individualism" (52)---to post-WWII
*we-centered* themes, in which blues artists began to celebrate the
possibility of full citizenship and participation in U.S. consumer
culture (194). Larson also asserts that not only did blues musicians and
their audiences encourage resistance to Jim Crow, they also prepared the
foundation for future civil rights movement activism. Moreover, Lawson
argues that U.S. popular culture owes a significant debt to the
African-American community for the musical and cultural forms that
emerged out of the blues enterprise.

Employing a clever titling structure that echoes his topic---chapters
are labeled "Sound Check," "Verse One," "Break," etc.---Lawson weaves
together keen analysis of blues lyrics with rigorous historical context.
At times, in fact, his discussion of the attendant historical factors
surrounding a given song or blues theme seems to take on a life of its
own and the blues thread is momentarily discarded. The reader may find
that the level of detail offered in explanation of the demise of
Reconstruction, the after effects of the Great Flood of 1927, the
demographic shifts of the Great Migrations, or the ramifications of the
New Deal in the Lower Mississippi Valley is not entirely necessary.

At the same time, such careful positioning of his sources in the
historical moment allows him to explicate the popularizing role of
performer and composer W. C. Handy, the significance of blues giant
Leadbelly's incarcerations, and the meaning of Muddy Waters's rise to
become "Chicago's famous silk-suited, pompadour-wearing, fully
electrified king of blues" (173). Under Lawson's considered evaluation,
such bluesmen become not just famous performers but also opportunities
for evaluating and assessing the various ways in which African Americans
accommodated to and resisted a society that continually sought to place
them in a subservient position.

In an especially fascinating section, Lawson shows how blues performers
dehumanized the Japanese but not the Germans during WWII. He argues that
blues performers recognized they could encourage patriotism by
stereotyping another racial minority group but not by doing the same to
white people---even if the Germans were state enemies. In this section,
as throughout the book, Lawson describes his subjects in the fullness of
their humanity. He writes not of one-dimensional saints and sinners, but
of human beings who failed, fought, wished, and won.

Lawson's narrative follows bluesmen in their peregrinations throughout
the South and in migration to the North; women are largely absent. He
explains that it was men who did most of the performing and, by
extension, shaped the counterculture so central to his argument,
although both women and men listened to and participated in the blues
scene. Leading figures like Ma Rainey and Lillie Mae Glover do make
brief appearances, but the women of the blues world that Tera Hunter
brings to life (*To 'Joy My Freedom: Southern Black Women's Lives and
Labors after the Civil War, 1997*) bear little on the story told here.
More deliberate integration of the perspectives of women would have made
for a richer presentation of the full reach of the blues counterculture.

Like gender, religion gets somewhat short shrift. Lawson does note that
blues performers embodied the very antithesis of Christian charity,
asceticism, and piety (1, 2, 64, 68, 72) but only in passing and without
a deeper examination of the connections that existed between blues
performers and Christian practitioners. As womanist scholar Cheryl A.
Kirk-Duggan notes, both black gospel and the blues "come out of a Black
aesthetic that reflects a history, ritual, and social interaction of a
collective Black ethnic, holistic, cultural identity" ("Justified,
Sanctified, and Redeemed: Blessed Expectation in Black Women's Blues and
Gospels," in Emilie Maureen Townes, ed. *Embracing the Spirit: Womanist
Perspectives on Hope, Salvation, and Transformation* [1997], 151). The
themes of sorrow and remorse, abandon and return, and faithfulness and
betrayal resonated with and were sometimes drawn from religious sources.
A bit more attention to those connections would have strengthened an
otherwise robust interrogation of blues lyrics.

Yet, in the larger context of cultural history, Lawson offers a
thorough, incisive, and meticulously researched analysis of Jim Crow era
blues. Readers leave the text with a new appreciation for the ways in
which one musical form and the counterculture that birthed and sustained
it allowed African Americans to name and claim a space of their own.
Reminiscent of Robin D. G. Kelley's work on working-class opposition to
Jim Crow in buses and job sites, Lawson's treatment offers fresh insight
into the intersection of resistance and accommodation in jook joints and
recording studios. Moreover, Lawson has done so in an accessible style
that challenges other cultural historians to set aside jargon and make
plain their claims.
