---
layout: article
title: "Review: Presbyterians in North Carolina"
author-first: Aaron W.
author-last: Sizer
author: Aaron W. Sizer
author-note: "Aaron W. Sizer is an adjunct lecturer in American Religion at Villanova University."
vol: 15
year: 2013
book-reviewed: "Walter H. Conser, Jr. and Robert J. Cain. <em>Presbyterians in North Carolina: Race, Politics, and Religious Identity in Historical Perspective</em>. Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press, 2012. 260 pp. ISBN 978-1-57233-849-4. "
---

The last decade has seen a surprising revival of scholarly interest in
American mainline Protestant denominations. The numerical strength of
the mainline continues to deteriorate, and its denominational
articulations become ever less distinct. This apparent decline, however,
has encouraged scholars to examine as historical phenomena traditions
that once faded invisibly into the mainstream. Likewise, recent studies
have moved beyond older institutional-historical approaches, placing
denominations in larger context and using the experience of individual
communions to illumine the American religious landscape as a whole.
Walter H. Conser, Jr. and Robert J. Cain’s new book lies at the
intersection of these two trends.

The volume’s opening section treats in geographical perspective the
first century and a half of Presbyterian settlement and growth in North
Carolina, from early communities on the Atlantic seaboard, to mass
migrations down the Valley of Virginia into the Piedmont, to ragged
outposts on the Appalachian frontier. The authors examine each region
with respect to colonization, education and institutional perpetuation,
revivalism, mission, and ecclesial schism. In some cases, the three
regions are not sufficiently differentiated to warrant separate
consideration. But through this cycle of evidence, the distinct shape of
North Carolina Presbyterianism does emerge. Conser and Cain describe a
conspicuously “ethnic” church, composed mostly of Highland and Ulster
Scots, propelled across the Atlantic by Old-World religio-political
acrimony. They highlight the tension between the Presbyterian penchant
for institutionalization and the frank impossibility of building
sufficient religious infrastructure in an area that was relatively
isolated until well into the nineteenth century. North Carolina
Presbyterians mostly lacked those connections to the broader Reformed
Protestant community that were present among their coreligionists in the
Middle Colonies, and were therefore somewhat insulated from the
Awakening-era controversies that rent the denomination in the 1730s. At
the same time, their location on the frontier made them particularly
susceptible to many developments at the root of nineteenth-century
Protestant disputes, especially with respect to interdenominational
cooperation, poor availability of trained ministers, and democratic
eruptions of rural revivalism. The authors make little attempt to
resolve this paradox; nevertheless, it raises stimulating questions
about an immigrant Protestant church, caught in the liminal space
between New World realities and an explicitly Old-World religious
identity.

The second part of the book proceeds quickly from the Civil War through
the realignments of the twentieth century to the present. The authors
frame this section in terms of the doctrine of the “spirituality of the
church”—that is, the characteristically southern-Presbyterian notion
that the church’s proper sphere of activity is wholly religious, and
that pastors or congregations ought not to be partisans in political
causes. After the southern church withdrew from the larger denomination
in 1861, this doctrine provided the ideological foundation for a century
of political quietism. Conser and Cain point to the ways that this
doctrine became its own refutation: surely the act of supporting slavery
or racial segregation involved church people in staking out definite
(and often public) political positions. Southern Presbyterian leaders’
support for civil rights beginning in the 1950s brought to a boil debate
over Presbyterian social involvement, pitting a relatively activist
clergy against a more conservative laity. The nexus of political and
theological issues surrounding this shift provided a roadmap to reunion
with northern Presbyterians, even as it provoked a conservative exodus
after the 1960s.

Though they offer few surprises, these primary narrative threads speak
to the usefulness of North Carolina Presbyterianism as a case study in
Protestant denominational development. Some aspects of the book will be
frustrating to scholars. The omission of a full bibliographical
apparatus is disappointing. Moreover, historians with only a secondary
interest in local circumstances will find some of the granular data to
be tedious, while those already familiar with Presbyterian history will
wish for a more focused narrative. The authors’ field of view is often
quite narrow, containing carefully cataloged movements of every
presbytery and congregation. At other times, the discussion of
Presbyterianism widens to the point that North Carolina’s story is
virtually lost. These quibbles aside, though, *Presbyterians in North
Carolina* represents another good argument for the potential
contributions of broadly conceived denominational histories. The authors
succeed in teasing from a great tangle of Presbyterian issues many
themes that elucidate American religious settlement, Protestant
institution-building, and mainline convergence. They do so with a
cogency that makes this book easy to recommend both to general readers
and historians interested in denominational religion in the American
South.
