---
layout: article
title: "Review: Arab and Jewish Women in Kentucky"
author-first: Laura
author-last: Stemp-Morlock
author: Laura Stemp-Morlock
author-note: "Laura Stemp-Morlock is a Ph.D. student in Religious Studies at the University of Waterloo."
vol: 15
year: 2013
book-reviewed: "Nora Rose Moosnick. <em>Arab and Jewish Women in 
Kentucky: Stories of Accommodation and Audacity</em>. Lexington: The University Press of Kentucky, 2012. xviii + 210 pp. ISBN 978-0-8131-3621-9. "
---

Nora Rose Moosnick's book, *Arab and Jewish Women in Kentucky: Stories
of Accommodation and Audacity*, grabs readers' attention before they
open the book. One does not immediately associate the words "Arab" or
"Jewish" with "Kentucky," nor does the combination elicit expectations
of affinity. Yet this is precisely what Moosnick seeks to redress in
this compelling look at the lives of ten Kentuckians whose lives, she
argues, are triply overlooked. Moreover, the fact that Kentucky does not
have anything like the immigrant populations of larger metropolitan
areas allows Moosnick to broaden her argument. "Kentucky harbors a
larger story about immigrants settling in places not traditionally
associated with them," she explains (xii).

Moosnick believes women's lives in particular provide insight into, and
appreciation of, Arabs' and Jews' diverse and overlapping lives in
Kentucky. The women in this book span several generations; they are
immigrants, first-, and second-generation Kentuckians. Contrary to
contemporary notions of previous generations restricted to the home,
immigrant women have long balanced the demands of family and work, while
facing the demands of living in a land that is not their native home.
Through their stories, Arab and Jewish women demonstrate common themes
within their lives, including identity, prejudice, success, public
service, mother-daughter relations, and gender.

As a sociologist, Moosnick grounds this oral history project in
sociological practices, reflecting on the contexts of the stories and
the process of gathering them. There are four chapters in which Moosnick
presents these stories, and each is centered around a common theme.
"Publicly Exceptional" describes Sarah and Frances Myers and Teresa
Isaac, who visibly and dramatically excelled in their Kentucky
communities and beyond. In "Maternal Echoes," Elsie Nasief and Gishi
Bloomfield's stories address mother-daughter relations and expectations
for Jewish and Arab mothers. Manar Shalash, Sawsan Salem, and Renee
Hymson in the chapter, "Into Focus," make maternal lives---both past and
present---more visible. "Archetypal and Distant Figures," presents the
many newly arrived women for whom the success of their children was
their primary focus. Moosnick weaves additional voices into these
narratives through direct quotes and references, as well as observations
she has drawn from informal interactions with Jewish and Arab
acquaintances.

Taken together, these chapters go a long way toward challenging common
stereotypes. For example, some Arab women in this book engage in their
communities in roles that include business and politics, while
negotiating their Arab identity, which for some is Christian. These
narratives challenge the common assumption that Arabs are all Muslim who
keep American society at arm's length. Similarly, Moosnick addresses the
notion that Jews and Arabs exist in perpetual tension with each other,
as foes or enemies. While making the overlooked point that a person may
be both Jewish and Arab, Moosnick also demonstrates that in Kentucky,
Arabs and Jews have quite a bit in common, since both groups have
negotiated a place for themselves in their new homes using similar
tactics.

While this work is academically informed and utilizes methodological and
analytical tools of qualitative research practices, Moosnick hopes to
reach as wide an audience as possible, including academics and the
general public. She unabashedly acknowledges that, "this work is truly a
labor of love," and her own story as a proud Kentuckian and Jew is
interwoven throughout (xv). This in no way diminishes the rigorous
analysis she draws from the narratives, and indeed expands it. Above
all, Moosnick seeks to reveal---through these women's tales---their
overlapping lives. She accomplishes this handily, providing her readers
a very engaging read along the way.
