---
layout: article
title: "Review: Word, Like Fire"
author-first: Jermaine
author-last: Thibodeaux
author: Jermaine Thibodeaux
author-note: "Jermaine Thibodeaux is a doctoral student in History at the University of Texas-Austin."
vol: 15
year: 2013
book-reviewed: "Valerie C. Cooper. <em>Word, Like Fire: Maria Stewart, 
the Bible, and the Rights of African Americans</em>. Charlottesville: University of Virginia Press, 2011. xiv + 210 pp. ISBN 978-0-8139-3188-3. "
---

Invoke the name Maria W. Stewart and most people will proudly showcase
their knowledge that Stewart was the first American woman of any race to
give a public address before a "promiscuous audience." Some may also
note her deep connections to abolitionism and women's rights. But beyond
those rather basic facts, little biographical detail remains known about
this force of a woman. For religious studies scholar, Valerie Cooper,
however, Stewart's personal and intellectual histories will *not*
languish in the dustbin of history. Instead, it is Cooper's mission in
*Word, Like Fire*, to rescue Stewart from relative obscurity and draw
attention to the fact that "Stewart may have had one of the most
unrecognized and underappreciated African American theological voices of
the nineteenth century" (1).

By providing close-readings of a representative sample of Stewart's five
published speeches from the years 1831 through 1833, Cooper demonstrates
how Stewart's meditations traversed multiple realms of thought. As such,
the author deems it counterproductive to view Stewart, her words, and
her world solely through the singular lens of race or gender. Though the
metalanguage of race loomed large in Stewart's life (as it did for all
blacks in America at that time), Cooper insists that Stewart's
religiosity and her embrace of the scriptures mattered too. In many
respects, the Bible truly governed her life and life's work, and
unquestionably, the scriptures helped shape Stewart's complex worldview.
Cooper cautions her readers never to divorce Stewart's political
ideology from her theological voice, as they are "at times, intertwined
and indivisible" (43).

Furthermore, Cooper contends that when interpreting black women's
writings or their histories, ideas of race and gender do indeed work
together "to produce a kind of double jeopardy for black women, but they
also produce the possibility of multiple levels of discourse in their
writings" (23). Accordingly, Cooper employs Mae Gwendolyn Henderson's
metaphor of *tongues* as "a useful heuristic for evaluating" Stewart and
other "black women's nineteenth-century biblical appropriation and
hermeneutics" (26). Moreover, for Stewart and other black women writers
and orators of the nineteenth century, their speeches oftentimes
addressed a broad spectrum of topics---from the mundane circumstances of
home life, to more substantial concerns in the political, philosophical,
and spiritual spheres. And without fail, they regularly drew on the
Bible as an unimpeachable source of inspiration *and* as a "mirror" to
explain contemporary problems and offer meaningful solutions. In this
regard, Stewart's works were both fairly conventional yet still in the
vanguard to some degree. For example, her evolving views on gender as
informed by scripture and her own lived experiences as a black woman
thrust her from her mentor's (David Walker, the fiery Boston
abolitionist) shadow.

Throughout four rather provocative chapters, Cooper brings sharp
historical and sociological insight to not only contextualize Stewart's
life as a free black woman in the North, but she also thoroughly
explicates the numerous theological motifs that permeate Stewart's
public speeches. Perhaps the adjective "thoroughly" does not adequately
capture the depth of Cooper's analysis, since each page in chapter one
contains rich scriptural, theoretical, and historical interpretation of
Stewart's words. Here, Cooper shines as a biblical scholar and student
of African American history especially. In a short second chapter,
Cooper unpacks Stewart's skillful use of the Bible to launch multiple
indictments on America's poor treatment of blacks and women. Cooper
highlights the webs of meaning found in Stewart's careful selection of
scriptural quotations and allegories. And again, she explains how
Stewart's fiery speeches allowed for multivalent interpretations among
the audience.

Stewart's gender concerns and her views on race and nation are the focus
of the third and fourth chapters. Here Cooper successfully demonstrates
how Stewart deployed familiar biblical stories and even political
treatises to justify her role as a preaching woman. For Stewart, vexing
gender conventions should not hinder any prophetic woman doing God's
work. And on matters of race, Stewart often invokes the Exodus motif to
explain the troublesome condition of blacks in America, while
simultaneously writing blacks "into positions of privilege, envisioning
for them a bright future and a special relationship with God" by
embracing Ethiopianism (174).

Ultimately, by the end of the *Word, Like Fire*, Stewart emerges as an
unimpeachable theological voice who acted not only as the foremother of
other African American luminaries like Frederick Douglass, Sojourner
Truth, and a coterie of black political and theological spokespersons,
but she was also a trailblazer. She was one of the first public figures
to preach the equality of the sexes and the races. Similarly, she
advocated a nascent form of Black Nationalism, long before Marcus Garvey
and others made it a part of the black liberation struggle.

Perhaps more people know of the well-documented conversion and exhorting
experiences of Jarena Lee or Sojourner Truth, but again, Cooper's
treatment of Stewart rightfully establishes her place as a coequal of
these two early black women and their theological minds. Altogether,
Cooper's work stuns as a refreshing take on Stewart's contributions to
America's long enduring conversations on matters of race and gender.
Here, Stewart enters these heavily interconnected discussions as a
sharply honed theological voice who has finally been showcased and
smartly examined in *Word, Like Fire*. What dogged this monograph and
others that focus on Stewart is a lack of source materials to further
unearth those missing details of her life, especially concerning her
relationship with her husband and David Walker. Still, this book will
certainly be of great use to scholars of religious studies and those
interested in women's and African American history.
