---
author: "Roberto R. Treviño"
author-first: "Roberto R."
author-last: "Treviño"
author-note: "Roberto R. Treviño is a professor emeritus of History at 
University of Texas at Arlington."
layout: article
title: 'Reflections on <em>The Church in the Barrio</em>'
vol: 15
year: 2013
---

Ten years into a career in Houston's public schools at age thirty-eight,
I packed my few possessions and drove off to California to start life
anew as a history graduate student at Stanford University. My Ph.D.
quest was deeply personal. It turned out to be a gratifying journey of
self-discovery but occasionally I questioned that life-altering
decision. One of those times was when I got the go-ahead to start my
dissertation research. Anxiety gripped me when I began to think I
wouldn't be able to research something directly out of my own life, a
dissertation topic that would satisfy the hunger for self-knowledge that
had led me to doctoral study in the first place. Quite unexpectedly, I
found the answer in a dissertation about Catholicism, which became the
book *The Church in the Barrio: Mexican American Ethno-Catholicism* in
Houston (University of North Carolina Press, 2006).

Some things only make sense in retrospect. The choice to study
Catholicism didn't make sense to me at first. After discussing other
topics with my mentor Albert Camarillo, I floated an idea firmly tied to
my own past, Mexican-American Protestantism. Baptized in the Texas
Mexican Presbyterian Church, I was reared in a church-going home. As a
family we had always belonged to a Presbyterian congregation, though at
times the distance from our own church and the disruptions of moving led
us temporarily into the pews of other Protestant churches. Growing up I
became comfortable with Presbyterian, Mennonite, and Baptist worship
services, and made friends at Presbyterian summer camp as well as in
Mennonite vacation Bible school, in a Baptist basketball league, and as
an undergraduate at Houston Baptist College. I remained in that familiar
Protestant-Presbyterian world well into adulthood.

Some of my earliest musings about history had been about the
ever-present importance of religion, so as I cast about for a
dissertation topic it made sense to propose a study of Mexican-American
Protestantism. Such a project would address a gap in U.S. historiography
and, though I didn't pitch it this way, it would nourish the connection
to my own past. My mentor's initial reactions encouraged me. He agreed
that historians, including his own cohort that pioneered Chicano
history, essentially had ignored religion's role in Mexican-American
history. Even church historians' treatment of religion among ethnic
Mexicans didn't reveal much about race and ethnic relations, class and
gender inequalities, and other social factors that had shaped
Mexican-American history. I expected a green light from Al after his
comments; instead, he redirected me to Catholicism.

But where was the connection to my own life? I had never set foot inside
a Catholic church, or even a playground; Catholicism, I thought at
first, was foreign to me. But after more thought I began to realize that
Catholicism had always been everywhere around me. My paternal
grandparents and numerous aunts, uncles, and cousins---all *muy
católicos* (very Catholic)---had been a large part of the daily
nourishment of my early life, providing companionship, knowledge,
emotional comfort, and much delicious food and fun. I began to realize
that living next door to my grandparents and being inseparable from my
cousins---except on Sundays---had significantly molded my childhood. As
I shaped the dissertation project I thought back to those happy years
and recalled things I had long wondered about---the ever-present images
of *la virgencita* (Our Lady of Guadalupe) that adorned calendars and
the flickering votive candles on neatly arranged *altarcitos* (home
altars); the earnestness with which my cousin scratched a *crucita*
(little cross) into the dirt where we found someone's lost nickel,
insisting that our luck would be repeated at that very spot some other
day; the automatic reflex of making the sign of the cross in certain
situations; my grandfather's stories and everyday sayings imbued with
Catholic imagery and language. These ruminations formed my research
questions and led me to understand more about myself, Mexican Americans,
and American society. Thank goodness for wise mentors!

*The Church in the Barrio* thus satisfied a deep need to wed the
professional with the personal in my research. To my relief, fellow
historians and other scholars found my arguments sound and judged the
book a worthy contribution. I've also been gratified over the years by
many positive comments from students and other scholars. Even a few
general readers have expressed their appreciation for the book after a
public talk; oftentimes, their comments clearly derive from a sense of
affirmation the book gave them, as it did me. Despite the positive
feelings I associate with *The Church in the Barrio*, I regret not
having thought deeply about Houston's southern heritage as I crafted my
story. Not that I was completely oblivious: I had described Houston as a
city "situated in the East Texas borderlands between South and West,"
and one "predicated on a Southern Protestant ethos" (7, 9). I even wrote
that "the Chicano experience has not been monolithic, either in terms of
region or religion" and cautioned that "we should be alert to the
nuances the interaction of these two factors may produce" (8).
Unfortunately, these were afterthoughts; they occurred to me during the
very last rewriting for the book's introduction. Foremost in my mind at
that point was to build a strong case for studying "new Chicano
communities" like Houston (as opposed to more familiar cities rooted in
the Spanish and Mexican Southwest). That worthy goal could have been
made more forcefully had the idea of Houston's southernness percolated
earlier in my thinking as I revised the main chapters.

For example, attention to the relevance of place would have enriched my
discussion of the racialization of Mexicans and other immigrants whom
Americans considered neither black nor white, such as Asians, Cape
Verdeans, and southern Italians who migrated to the South. Highlighting
the Italians, I wrote that "Americans ... denigrated them as
'kinky-haired Africans' because of their 'swarthy' complexion and the
fact that they were from the *mezzogiorno*, the part of Italy that is
the hottest and closest to Africa." I pointed out that "[i]n the black
and white South of the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries,
the guardians of the color line tried to keep Italian children from
attending white schools and sometimes lynched adults who violated
southern racial protocols by working and socializing with blacks,"
adding that "Anglos treated Tejanos in much the same way and for very
similar reasons" during the same era. I also observed that "in
constructing their racial views, whites emphasized Mexicans' alleged
savage Aztec Indian background," an "added twist" that set them apart"
(84). But even though I drew a strong historical parallel and pointed
out how those experiences were also different, I didn't elaborate on how
geography might explain those similarities and differences.

Surprisingly, only one reviewer raised the question of what Houston's
location might mean. In *The Western Historical Quarterly* historian
Todd Kerstetter praised the book as "a magnificent stride toward
explaining the significance of religion" in the lives of Mexican
Americans, and highlighted its utility for those interested in ethnic,
religious, and Texas history. Then he astutely asked: "What about those
interested in the American West? To an extent, that depends upon whether
one believes Houston rests in the West or in the South." Happily, for
me, Kerstetter went on to say, "In a larger and more important way,
though, Treviño adds information critical to understanding the West's
longstanding relationship with Mexico, which is rapidly becoming a
national phenomenon rather than a regional one." [^1] That sentence took
some of the sting out of a legitimate criticism. More importantly, his
important question affirmed the direction my thinking had begun to take.

The publication of *The Church in the Barrio* coincided with an emerging
literature engendered by heavy Mexican and other Latin American
immigration into the South and reflected in the catchy phrase the
"*nuevo* New South." In that context I began planning a new project
about religion and the Chicano movement, but now more purposely
considering the interpretive potential of Houston's geographical
setting. That process reminded me that determining whether Houston is
best studied as part of the South or of the West is no simple task. As
historian Ty Cashion cleverly observed, the "distinctly western
characteristics" of parts of Texas dictate that "[s]tories of cowboys
and Indians and the great cattle drives, the buffalo hunt on the
southern plains, Texas Rangers and border bandits . . . are better told
over a margarita than a mint julep." [^2] But what about Houston? Early
in my research, native Houstonian Bishop John McCarthy insisted that
Houston is a southern city. When you leave the Bayou City and head west
on Interstate 10, he explained, somewhere before you get to the Alamo
City the South ends and the Southwest begins.

For me the question of Houston's southernness or westernness isn't
either-or, but both. I see Houston as a borderland, a place whose
history has been shaped by influences emanating from both the American
South and the Southwest. Houston is an in-between place; in the symbolic
language of the U.S. civil rights movements, it's where Selma meets
Aztlán. As I re-read documents about the lives of religious men and
women I had written about in the book's chapter on the *movimiento* in
Houston, things that had seemed irrelevant before now suggested new
implications, especially for an inter-racial framework for the study: a
bishop who had been immersed in a Mexican setting before becoming the
driving force of black-and-white interracial dialogue in Houston; a
priest who had stood in solidarity with African Americans in Selma
before getting involved in Chicano causes; a Chicana nun who had joined
civil rights activities in Alabama before jumping into the movimiento in
Houston; and others with overlapping black and brown experiences. I
hammered these ideas into a conference paper titled "Aztlán Meets Selma:
Regional Elements, the Catholic Church, and Houston's Chicano Movement,"
which hypothesized,

> The Chicano movement in Houston arose in the context and under the
> influence of Houston's southern roots, which included a large and
> long-established African-American population with its own civil rights
> tradition. For most of its history, Houston had been a black-and-white
> city. But by the 1960s the city had become racially
> tripartite---black, white, and increasingly brown. Thus, Houston's
> Chicano movement would draw inspiration and be shaped by elements
> associated with both the South's Black Freedom Struggle and the
> Mexican Americans' Southwestern heritage, particularly their Roman
> Catholicism and their own tradition of resistance that had become
> apparent from Texas to California by the mid-1960s. I suggest that
> these twin influences---southern and southwestern, Selma and
> Aztlán---alternately constrained and propelled the movimiento in the
> Bayou City. While regional factors at times impeded the Chicano cause
> for social equality, ultimately they also provided a timely confluence
> of leaders who---because of their personal experiences and ministry
> among both Mexican Americans and African Americans---recognized the
> shared nature of the oppression these groups faced, and worked to
> overcome it. [^3]

That embryonic essay illustrates how *The Church in the Barrio* can be a
point of departure for research that would further the understanding of
religion in the South. The tripartite racial landscape that forms the
book's backdrop implicitly challenges the usefulness the black-white
binary model for examining religion and civil rights in the South's
westernmost fringes. Clearly, the Chicano and African-American movements
in Houston would be best examined with awareness about how each
community's presence in the city affected their contemporaneous
struggles, not as isolated developments. In a similar vein, the book
reminds us that southern inter-racialism becomes more complex when
religious space is shared by ethnic Mexicans and African Americans. What
more might be learned about the role of religion in race relations when
it is examined in a place like St. Raphael parish, where forty percent
of the parishioners were African Americans and the rest of Mexican
origin? Lastly, the book's epilogue introduces Houston's increasingly
larger and more complex Latino make-up after the 1970s. In those closing
pages I suggested that even with the large influx of other Latinos
Mexican ethno-Catholicism remained vibrant in the early twenty-first
century. But has that changed? In sum, the implications of Houston's
ethno-racial and religious pluralism are key to a fuller understanding
of the South's largest city.

I leave most of these ideas for research for others. In retirement I
find my interests strongly arching back to the personal again, and I am
pursuing a family history project I never had time for before.
Ultimately, *The Church in the Barrio* achieved my personal goals as
well as some important professional ones. Fundamentally driven by a need
to better understand myself and Mexican Americans as part of the mosaic
of the human family, the book also contributed to our understanding of
Mexican-American history in Texas, enlarged our view of "American"
religious history, and to some degree illuminated the history of the
American West. Additionally, the book can be a gateway for further study
of religion in the American South.

[^1]: Todd Kerstetter, review of *The Church and the Barrio*, by Roberto
    R. Treviño, *The Western Historical Quarterly*, 38.3 (2007):
    402--403.

[^2]: Ty Cashion, "What's the Matter with Texas?: The Great Enigma of
    the Lone Star State in the American West," *Montana: The Magazine of
    Western History*, 55.4 (2005): 6.

[^3]: Roberto R. Treviño, "Aztlán Meets Selma: Regional Elements, the
    Catholic Church, and Houston's Chicano Movement" (paper presented at
    the annual Texas State Historical Association/Texas Catholic
    Historical Society Conference, San Antonio, Texas, March 8--10,
    2007).
