---
layout: article
title: "Review: The True Image"
author-first: Barry A.
author-last: Vann
author: Barry A. Vann
author-note: "Barry A. Vann is a professor of Geography and Higher Education at the University of the Cumberlands."
vol: 15
year: 2013
book-reviewed: "Daniel W. Patterson. <em>The True Image: Gravestone Art 
and the Culture of Scotch Irish Settlers in the Pennsylvania and 
Carolina Backcountry</em>. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2012. 496 pp. ISBN 978-0-8078-3567-8. "
---

It is not often that a book comes along that offers valuable information
to both discerning academics and lay people. Daniel W. Patterson has
accomplished that challenging feat. As one would expect from a book
published by the University of North Carolina Press, *The True Image*
does not read like a research-laden dissertation. Patterson uses vivid
prose that is enjoyable and informative; however, he, like a number of
other earnest writers, bases much of his work on the association among
the Scotch-Irish, other Protestant ethnicities in Ulster, and
Presbyterianism.

As one who has traipsed through countless Scottish and southern
cemeteries reading names, dates, and other personal tidbits on funerary
stones especially as they relate to Presbyterian congregations, I admire
Patterson's passion and enjoyed his insights into the dexterity used to
craft headstones that marked the personal eschatologies of
Presbyterians. I am also delighted by the way he explains the value of
different rocks and how local land features affected the choice of
materials used as markers. Because some of the materials used in
crafting headstones had to be imported, especially for those clients who
were interred in sandy areas where rock material was scant, there was a
distinct social class dimension to decorating one's grave.

That particular subject could have received more attention because, as
the subtitle of the book implies, the focus of the book is the
backcountry of the Carolinas and Pennsylvania. The backcountry, as
described by David Hackett Fischer, was found in the Appalachian
Mountains where poverty precluded many of the faithful from buying
expensive grave markers. Instead, Patterson focuses most of his
attention on more affluent Presbyterian communities in the Piedmont
region of North Carolina.

Patterson's command of the literature suggests that he has been engaged
in studying the Scotch-Irish for a number of years. His bibliography
reflects a wealth of primary and secondary sources that are solid,
especially with respect to material cultures found in the South, in
Ulster, and in Scotland; however, his Scotch-Irish sources are somewhat
dated. Nevertheless, the older, yet seminal, works are cited: James
Leyburn's social history (1989), Patrick Griffin's *People with No Name*
(2001), and Marilyn Westerkamp's *Triumph of the Laity* (1988). Missing,
however, are a number of recently published books on the formation of a
distinct Ulster Scots (Scotch-Irish) and other Protestant communities in
the north of Ireland and their American counterparts in the
"backcountry," including the western reaches of the Carolinas and
Pennsylvania.

While Patterson seems to recognize the mosaic of ethnicities that made
up the Protestant community in Ulster and in America, who early on
called themselves "Irish," he steps into the quicksand that so many
American writers have found themselves. The tendency on this side of the
Atlantic is to assume that the Scots, Germans, English, and French
Protestants who settled in Ulster formed a distinct Presbyterian
community on the emerald Isle. This situation makes it handy for us to
label their American descendants as "Scotch Irish." A more thorough
reading of recent research would have cast some light on that flawed
assumption. Indeed, various Protestant groups in Ulster more often than
not settled into faith communities (i.e., Baptists, Quakers, and
Episcopalians) and did not assimilate into the Presbyterian community
that was dominated by Ulster Scots.

On a similar note, many writers, including Patterson, have assumed that
"Presbyterian" and "Scotch-Irish" can be used interchangeably. Patterson
discusses how many Presbyterian ministers in Pennsylvania and the
Carolinas were educated at the College of New Jersey (later renamed
Princeton University). He even mentions the New Light Presbyterians and
the Great Awakening, but he misses the mark in describing the reason for
the emergence of the New Lights and their college in the first place.
When Francis Makemie, the founder of American Presbyterianism and a
graduate of the University of Glasgow in Scotland came to America, he
and others of the cloth who followed him wanted to evangelize throughout
the colonies, regardless of whether or not potential congregants were of
Scotch-Irish lineage. Besides, the Kirk of Scotland became officially
Presbyterian in 1690, so ministers and church planters who came to
Pennsylvania and the Carolinas may well have arrived straight from
Scotland, having never set a foot in Ulster. Without specific family
histories, ship records, or other documentation that historically places
a surname in Scotland and Ulster, one is hard pressed to locate
precisely a so-called Scotch-Irish family's place of origin. In other
words, many of the Presbyterian folk who are buried in church yards in
the Carolina Piedmont region may not have had any connection to Ulster.

Although some of Patterson's assumptions about labeling families as
Scotch-Irish may not be accurate, *The True Image* offers a
well-written, delightfully vivid depiction of the history of
Presbyterian funerary art. Historians, geographers, and lay people
interested in family histories will find the book inviting and a
rewarding read.
