---
layout: article
title: "Review: Links"
author-first: Melissa
author-last: Walker
author: Melissa Walker
author-note: "Melissa Walker is George Dean Johnson Jr. Professor of History at Converse College."
vol: 15
year: 2013
book-reviewed: "William A. Link. <em>Links: My Family in American History</em>. Gainesville: University Press of Florida, 2012. xvi + 224 pp. ISBN 978-0-8130-3794-3. "
---

*Links* is the story of the remarkable partnership of two southern-born
intellectuals who navigated the rapidly-changing America of the
mid-twentieth century. This fascinating portrait charts the lives and
marriage of Arthur Link, the esteemed Woodrow Wilson scholar, and his
wife, Margaret Douglas Link, sociologist turned wife, mother, and
community activist. Author William A. Link, the youngest of the couple's
four children, follows them from separate childhoods in North Carolina,
to graduate school at Chapel Hill, to the academic circles in Princeton
and Chicago, and to their eventual retirement in the land of their
upbringing. Link combines the personal perspective of a son remembering
his parents with the historian's craft of combing primary sources,
carefully situating them in the larger milieu of post-war America.
*Links* offers fresh insights into the changes in the post-war South.
Like their academic contemporary, C. Vann Woodward, Arthur and Margaret
Link maintained their lifelong identity as southerners even as they grew
to question and eventually reject the South's racial norms. The book
also provides a compelling picture of the evolving world of twentieth
century academia.

The young couple met while both were graduate students at the Institute
for Research in the Social Sciences at the University of North Carolina
at Chapel Hill. In the late 1930s, Chapel Hill had become mecca for
young southern intellectuals who wanted to harness scholarly activity in
the interest of social change. Margaret Douglas initially saw Arthur
Link as egotistical and self-absorbed. Over time, however, the two
developed a deep and supportive friendship. After Margaret left Chapel
Hill to teach at Queens College in Charlotte and Arthur lived in
Washington and New York while researching his dissertation, the two
engaged in a lively correspondence. Their friendship ultimately
blossomed into a romance. They married in 1945, settling first in
Princeton, later in Evanston where Arthur taught at Northwestern, and
then back in Princeton.

Princeton was not a particularly welcoming academic community to Arthur,
and Margaret was lonely there. Her work-obsessed husband was rarely
home, and she spent long hours alone. Margaret gave up her teaching
career to be a full-time wife and mother. William says his mother was
always a "little restless with the role of wife and mother" and
that later in life, she "remained an insistent believer that women
should seek careers" (113, 112).

Arthur was something of a wunderkind at Princeton, quickly establishing
a reputation as a promising scholar and teacher. But his career stalled
after the publication of his first Wilson biography, *The Road to the
White House* (1947). Professional jealousies halted his meteoric advance
through the faculty ranks, and in 1949, he was courted by Northwestern
University. He, Margaret, and their four children spent eleven
productive, happy years in the welcoming community of Evanston and one
idyllic year in England when Arthur was awarded the coveted Harmsworth
Professorship at Oxford. Much to Margaret's chagrin as well as the
frustration of his Northwestern colleagues, Princeton succeeded in
wooing Arthur back in 1960 after he was named editor of the Woodrow
Wilson papers. He was convinced that Princeton provided the best
location and environment for editing the Wilson papers, the endeavor
that absorbed him for the rest of his career.

Link says that his parents based their partnership in ideas and belief,
particularly a strong Christian practice. Raised a Lutheran, Arthur
willingly followed his wife to the Presbyterian church of her childhood
after their marriage. Both Links maintained grounding in Reformed
traditions throughout their lives. Link says that Arthur remained a
religious rationalist whose faith informed his entire life; Arthur
believed that "the faith of doing rejected simple answers," and he was
intolerant of faith that was "sanctimonious or self-serving" (193).
Margaret Link, heavily influenced by a sermon by Harry Emerson Fosdick
of Riverside Church she heard during a 1944 visit to New York City,
embraced a Christianity rooted in the social gospel, rejecting the
fundamentalist Presbyterianism of her youth.

Both Links were appalled by the rabid racism of the South in the late
1940s and the 1950s, but of the two, Margaret had the more activist
bent. She was involved in many kinds of interracial organizing dating
back to her work with the YWCA in Richmond. In Charlotte, she was active
in local Council of Interracial Cooperation activities, and, during the
second stint in Princeton, she was involved in a YWCA campaign to
integrate housing Arthur's activism was quieter and based in his
academic career. He counted many African-American scholars among his
friends, and John Hope Franklin was one of his closest ones. He raised
eyebrows at Princeton by bringing black scholars to speak on campus as
early as the 1940s.

Link is unsparing in his presentation of his parents. The reader becomes
acquainted with the arrogant, self-absorbed workaholic scholar who felt
constantly torn between his work and his family. "Most of the time his
work won out," writes his son (114). Arthur craved the limelight and
loved to hold forth. He cleaned the house and gardened for diversion,
and he was deeply attached to his wife, often lamenting his loneliness
and her absence in his correspondence during their frequent separations
due to his work. Margaret was a good partner for him. She was a good
listener, who tempered his self-absorption and his relentless drive to
work. Link describes Arthur as "an emotional project who would fulfill
Margaret's need to express love through caring" (78).

*Links* is carefully researched. William Link combed his parents'
voluminous correspondence and papers and interviewed family, friends,
and colleagues to flesh out his own memories of his parents. The book
emphasizes the couple's young adult years, in part because their ample
trove of courtship letters provides a rich source of data, and I was
left craving a fuller picture of the Links in middle and old age. The
book's organization, particularly in the first third of the book, is
occasionally confusing. In spite of these shortcomings, the book is a
fascinating portrait of a marriage and of two strong-willed, loving
people who built a successful partnership.
