---
layout: article
title: "Review: Knights of the Golden Circle"
author-first: W. J.
author-last: Wallace
author: W. J. Wallace
author-note: "W. J. Wallace is an associate professor of History at Samford University."
vol: 15
year: 2013
book-reviewed: "David C. Keehn. <em>Knights of The Golden Circle: Secret 
Empire, Southern Secession, Civil War</em>. Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 2013. xii + 308 pages. ISBN 978-0-80715-004-7. "
---

In the summer of 1859 an organization calling itself the Knights of the
Golden Circle achieved national notoriety as an influential secret
society formed to defend the rights southern slaveholders. Their early
purposes included expanding southern imperial interests into the "golden
circle" of Mexico, Central America, and the Caribbean. With the election
of Abraham Lincoln, however, the Knights turned their attention to
encouraging secession from the union, and, more aggressively,
paramilitary seizure of arsenals and forts to be used to supply the yet
to be formed Confederate army. At the onset of the war, the Knights were
by and large absorbed into Confederate politics and the military. But at
the war's end, members of the order reemerged as central conspirators in
the plot to assassinate President Lincoln.

David Keehn's *Knights of The Golden Circle* traces the story of this
secret society from its origins in the political turmoil of the late
1850s through the Civil War. Keehn's study is an ambitious and
well-researched work that seeks to demonstrate how a clandestine
association of like-minded individuals turned the southern version of
manifest destiny into an influential political force. His work is all
the more interesting because secret societies are, well, secret. Thus,
they are not the most reliable repositories of written sources upon
which historians generally rely.

Keehn's narrative divides into three time periods. The first extends
from 1859 to 1860. During these years, the Knights' primary goal was
expansion of slaveholding interests into the Southern hemisphere,
particularly Mexico. George Bickley, a big-talking vocationally adrift
huckster, spearheaded the movement on the pattern of another secret
society, the Order of the Lone Star (OLS). OLS members were active
"filibusterers"---private military expedition forces who took it upon
themselves to invade Latin American countries in the name of American
interests. The Knights set out to conduct similar operations in northern
Mexico, but the leadership did not wish to be associated with the
filibuster tradition. They insisted its members would comply with Unites
States neutrality laws, and that they would invade only if invited by
Mexican sympathizers. An invitation was not forthcoming and the venture
faded. Still, this period served to organize the Knights into a
hierarchical structure that could direct and promote its purposes across
the South.

The second period covers mid-1860 through 1861. With Lincoln's election
the Knights dropped their primary goal of invading Mexico and threw
their efforts behind the southern governors who were lobbying for
secession. They also disassociated themselves from Bickley's leadership
and reorganized on a decentralized model led by regimental commanders at
the state level. Keehn argues that through this decentralized multistate
network, the Knights became the most influential secret society
advocating secession. In particular, they saw success in Texas,
Virginia, and Kentucky. Also in this period, the Knights employed
intimidation tactics to frighten southern unionists, and they initiated
bold if not rash plans to secure federal forts and arsenals in the
southern states. While most members of the Knights of the Golden Circle
eventually joined the Confederate army, elements of the organization
remained active early in the war only later to be absorbed into more
transparent pro-southern groups such as the Minute Men and the National
Volunteers.

Finally, Keehn examines the period from mid-1864 to the assassination of
President Lincoln. Here, the story concentrates on the possibility of a
rejuvenated Knights of The Golden Circle, intent on sabotage,
kidnapping, and even murder as the Confederacy faced its inevitable
demise. Keehn gives particular attention to John Wilkes Booth, a member
of the Knights from its earliest days, and a core group his cohorts
concentrated around Baltimore and Washington. While the evidence is
largely circumstantial, Keehn implies that affiliates of the Knights of
the Golden Circle aided and abetted Booth and company in a failed plot
to kidnap the president, as well as in Lincoln's assassination on April
14, 1865.

The strength of Keehn's argument lies in the first part the book in his
treatment of George Bickley and his early efforts to establish the
Knights into a paramilitary organization committed to southern
slaveholding imperialism. His research provides the most extensive
scholarship on Bickely to date, and Keehn offers a compelling account of
how the Knights understood their mission in the political context of the
times. Also of great value is Keehn's contribution to our understanding
of the organizational structure of the Knights of The Golden Circle.
Membership consisted of three "degrees"---the military, the commercial
and financial, and the governing, the first being the rank-and-file and
the last being the leadership. Moreover, the work ably demonstrates how
the intimidation tactics and militarism of an antebellum secret society
translated with some ease into later extremist organizations such as the
Ku Klux Klan.

A weakness of the book is Keehn's contention that the Knights played an
instrumental role in Texas's secession movement as well as in empowering
Virginia's secessionist minority. Keehn offers very little evidence that
the Knights possessed such influence, nor does he provide a clear cause
and effect relationship linking the group to the politics of secession
in these states. Many organizations apart from the Knights were urging
secession in Texas and Virginia in the early months of 1861, and if the
Knights were as influential as Keehn claims more evidence needs to be
forthcoming. Similarly, associating the Knights with the conspirators
who assassinated Lincoln demands much more evidence than this study
provides. Keehn includes many qualifiers in this section of his
study---"perhaps," "maybe," "likely"---but again fails to establish
causation.

Despite the unconvincing arguments mentioned above, *Knights of the
Golden Circle* remains a valuable contribution to the field of Civil War
studies. Keene's work is the best examination of the origins and
activities of the Knights of The Golden Circle to date, and will likely
remain a required text on the subject.
