---
layout: article
title: "Review: Into the Pulpit"
author-first: Howell
author-last: Williams
author: Howell Williams
author-note: "Howell Williams is the Director of Student Success at The Learning House."
vol: 15
year: 2013
book-reviewed: "Elizabeth Flowers. <em>Into the Pulpit: Southern Baptist 
Women and Power Since World War II</em>. Chapel Hill: The University of North Carolina Press. xii + 280 pp. ISBN 978-0-80783-534-0. "
---

Elizabeth Flowers's *Into the Pulpit* explores how the "woman question"
framed the Southern Baptist Convention's (SBC) history since World War
II and more dramatically during the post-1979 rise of conservative
control within the denomination. Rather than concentrating on
theological debates or the battle rhetoric exchanged amongst the SBC,
Flowers places the voices and experiences of women at the center of the
narrative by drawing on fieldwork, navigating and presenting different
interpretations of the time period, and textual research. She notes that
while conservatives were first galvanized by the inerrancy debate, it
was questions surrounding the status of women's roles in church and
society that prolonged and intensified denominational divisions,
particularly in relation to the Women's Missionary Union (WMU).

Flowers divides the book into an introduction, five thematic and
chronological chapters, and an epilogue. Chapter 1 traces the SBC's rise
to denominational efficiency and financial prosperity following the
fifteen years after the end of World War II. However, this financial
stability and the optimistic cohesion did not endure as civil rights,
feminism, liberalism, and political unrest shook up southern culture. By
the early 1960s, SBC seminaries reflected the larger cultural and
biblical debates, such as liberalism and inerrancy, happening across
denominations. During this period, Flowers weaves in early examples of
women's ordination, noting how the WMU's nurturing of women to follow
"God's call" to ministry was a natural precursor to this development
(even though the WMU remained rather neutral and accommodating to
conservative cultural constructions within Baptist life). As more women
moved into the pulpit in the 1970s, many Baptists viewed it is an
example of radical feminism, while a small but growing group embraced
the change.

Debates over liberalism were happening in the wider American cultural
narrative; and, in Chapter 2, Flowers provides specific examples of how
evangelical feminism and traditional womanhood collided in 1970s Baptist
life. Southern Baptists eventually had to confront the rhetoric of
submission and the woman question. Hard lines were drawn at seminaries,
within and between denominational administrative divisions, and in local
and regional congregations. Meanwhile, the WMU attempted to maintain
neutral territory. By the close of the 1970s, the "woman question" was
centralized in debates about power and equality related to the
increasing (yet rare) reality of women's ordination. While women's
ordination was still infrequent and relegated to isolated cases, Baptist
moderates and supporters of women's ordination were hopeful that
progress would only intensify.

The optimism came to an abrupt halt in 1979, as Adrian Rogers ascended
to the presidency of the SBC and Jerry Falwell's Moral Majority
influenced the larger cultural wars. In Chapter 3, Flowers argues that
the southern conservative debate was acutely framed by questions of
womanhood. Within Baptist circles, conservatives promoted women's
submission to set the tone of the inerrancy debates, while the once
influential work of the WMU became more marginalized. Attempts were made
to construct a theology of Baptist women in ministry through a formal
network of support, but not without its own internal tensions between
those that wanted to adopt a more radical feminist stance and others who
wanted to avoid controversy.

Flowers asserts that by the early 1980s, women's ordination was a
denominational litmus test. Male conservative leaders rallied around
women's submission in the church and conservative women's ministry
stressed domestic matters. Churches that supported women's ordination
were disfellowshiped and conservative Baptist leaders took over
denominational agencies. Seminaries and boards released several
denominational statements, such as an amended Baptist Faith and Message,
which muted compromises over women and gender roles. Despite
conservative fears, the reality was that few women in the SBC were being
ordained and even fewer were making it to senior pastor roles.

By the late nineties, Baptist moderates used women's ordination as a
significant distinguisher from conservatives. However, Flowers argues
that moderates, positioning themselves as "mainstream," nullified
significant social action by reframing the "women question" as one of
soul competency and an issue best resolved through local church
autonomy. By the twenty-first century, Flowers asserts that Baptist
moderates might have "come a long way, baby" in supporting women's
ordination (186). If one were to measure progress by females in senior
pastorates or staff positions, however, the glass ceiling remains to be
shattered.

Flowers does a fine job of weaving together disparate voices and
cultural currents into the narrative. The paradox of conservative
Baptist women arguing for women's submission by leading campaigns
against women's ordination is not without irony. Conversely, Flowers
unearths several contradictions amongst moderate voices and leaders
unable to usher in significant acceptance of women's ordination or
compromise with conservatives. Flowers leaves the narrative a bit
unfinished as women's ordination remains a deeply polarizing issue
within the variances of Baptist life and culture. Her portrayal of
Baptist women's history in the mid-to-late twentieth century is a
welcome addition to work on women and religion, leaving the reader
wondering if and when the "women question" will arise in a different
form during the twenty-first century.
