---
layout: article
title: "Review: Moral Minority"
author-first: Daniel K.
author-last: Williams
author: Daniel K. Williams
author-note: "Daniel K. Williams is an associate professor of History at the University of West Georgia."
vol: 15
year: 2013
book-reviewed: "David R. Swartz. <em>Moral Minority: The Evangelical Left in an Age of Conservatism</em>. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2012. vi + 376 pp. ISBN 978-0-8122-4441-0. "
---

David Swartz's *Moral Minority* asks scholars of modern American
religion to consider an alternative historical path for recent
evangelical politics. Imagine what would have happened if, instead of
campaigning for Republican candidates and lobbying against same-sex
marriage, evangelical activists had devoted their recent political
efforts to opposing America's military ventures in the Middle East,
lobbying for universal health care coverage, and demanding a more
progressive system of taxation. In other words, imagine what would have
happened if the evangelical left of the early 1970s had emerged as the
dominant born-again Christian political voice instead of Jerry Falwell's
Moral Majority and Pat Robertson and Ralph Reed's Christian Coalition.
This scenario would have seemed plausible to many people in the early
1970s, Swartz argues. *Moral Minority* explains why the evangelical left
began with a lot of promise, but also why it ultimately failed to attain
lasting political influence.

Swartz frames his narrative around an analysis of the major figures who
signed the Chicago Declaration of 1973, an early landmark statement of
evangelical social concern. With only a few exceptions, most of the
evangelical activists profiled in the book, such as Jim Wallis, Sharon
Gallagher, Richard Mouw, and Ron Sider, grew up in conservative
evangelical homes in the early postwar era, and then, like many others
of their generation, embraced the politics of the left in college or
graduate school during the 1960s. Their encounter with the secular
social justice movements of the era convinced them that as followers of
Jesus, they needed to practice the politics of nonviolent social
engagement and confront the problems of poverty, war, and inequality.

The evangelical left borrowed heavily from the political agenda of the
secular New Left of the late 1960s, but it remained distinctively
Christian. When some New Left activists embraced the use of violence or
the desecration of private property in order to make a political point,
evangelical leftists refused to follow suit. They repeatedly insisted
that their political activism was merely an extension of their attempt
to bring Jesus's message to the world, and that they were simply doing
what Jesus would have done if he had been living in America in the late
twentieth century. Yet whereas many evangelicals of their parents'
generation had viewed the call to follow Jesus in strictly
individualistic, apolitical terms, the young evangelical activists
believed that the gospel message was social and political, as well as
personal.

For a brief moment, it appeared that the evangelical left had a chance
to become a dominant political voice in evangelicalism. But almost as
quickly as the movement began, it started to fragment along theological
and ideological lines. Anabaptists wanted to go much further than
Reformed evangelicals in opposing war and poverty. Whereas many Reformed
evangelicals in the movement believed that they could work within
existing political structures, Anabaptists called for an embrace of
poverty and a withdrawal from political institutions. In addition to
theological fissures, gender divisions also plagued the movement.
Feminist evangelical women struggled to gain a voice in a movement that
was dominated by men.

Ultimately, though, what marginalized the evangelical left was the
growing secularism of the Democratic Party, which became increasingly
uninterested in its religious constituents. The evangelical left was
also hurt by its own insensitivity to some of the cultural concerns of
more conservative evangelicals in the early 1980s. When the Moral
Majority and other Christian Right organizations made opposition to
abortion a signature issue, they succeeded in mobilizing large numbers
of evangelicals in a way that the evangelical left had not, and they
helped to put Ronald Reagan in the White House. For the next
quarter-century, when media outlets covered evangelical politics, they
nearly always focused on the Christian Right and almost forgot that
there had ever been an evangelical left.

Now, though, the evangelical left may be poised for a comeback, mostly
because of the interest of a younger generation of evangelicals in a
more progressive form of politics. Evangelicals under 30 are much less
loyal to the Republican Party than the evangelicals of their parents'
generation were, and many of them express strong concern about the
environment, global poverty, and social justice. Wallis has reemerged as
an influential political voice, and subscriptions to his Sojourners
magazine have surged. Some young evangelical activists, such as Shane
Claiborne, have been practicing a form of direct social engagement with
poverty that closely parallels the social activism that Wallis and Sider
pioneered nearly four decades ago.

Although *Moral Minority* is a magnificent study of a movement that has
too often been ignored in chronicles of postwar evangelical politics, it
probably underestimates the degree to which American evangelicals had
already become committed to political conservatism by the early 1970s.
The failure of left-leaning evangelicals to mobilize their fellow
Christians for Democratic presidential candidate George McGovern in 1972
demonstrated how isolated their views were, even at the movement's
inception. Evangelicals such as Wallis and Sider remained fringe voices
because their brand of politics was out of touch with the evangelical
mainstream. As recently published studies by historians such as Darren
Dochuk, Matthew Lassiter, and Steven Miller have demonstrated, the
Christian Right that emerged in the late 1970s had roots in a
politically conservative evangelical culture that had been developing
for decades before Falwell's Moral Majority appeared on the scene. The
evangelical left attempted to challenge the prevailing conservative
political culture of its religious environment, but it ultimately failed
to gain much influence. Falwell, on the other hand, tapped into this
culture and, as a result, gained a much larger following.

Swartz reminds us, though, that the Christian Right never spoke for all
evangelicals. In *Moral Minority*, Swartz has given us a superbly
written, impressively researched, insightful account of a movement that
historians of postwar American religion have too long neglected. Only a
handful of scholarly monographs give significant attention to the
evangelical left of the 1970s, and of the few such studies that do
exist, *Moral Minority* is by far the best.
