---
layout: article
title: "Review: "
author-first: 
author-last: 
author: 
author-note: "Maggie L. Yancey is a doctoral candidate in History at the University of Tennessee."
vol: 15
year: 2013
book-reviewed: "H. Paul Thompson, Jr. <em>A Most Stirring and 
Significant Episode: Religion and the Rise and Fall of Prohibition in 
Black Atlanta, 1865-1887</em>. 338 pp. DeKalb: Northern Illinois University Press, 2012. ISBN 978-0-87580-458-3. "
---

H. Paul Thompson breaks new ground with *A Most Stirring and Significant
Episode*. This excellent work offers a book-length study of African
Americans in the nineteenth-century temperance movement, and is also a
welcome contribution to the growing field of literature about temperance
and prohibition in the southern United States. Focusing on the
freedpeople of Atlanta, Thompson takes seriously the role that religion
played in this community's reform efforts.

*A Most Stirring and Significant Episode* is organized in two parts, the
first of which is concerned with northern evangelical missionaries and
their motivations for and means of spreading their temperance message to
Black Atlanta. The second part is a detailed community study of Black
Atlanta's response to, and ownership of, that message, with special
attention given to Atlanta's 1885 and 1887 elections in which
prohibition was enacted and then reversed. Two useful appendices, forty
pages of endnotes, and a thorough index complete the volume.

Thompson positions his work alongside that of other scholars who have
been examining temperance through the lens of religion, citing Robert
Abzug and Douglas Carlson among others. Thompson argues "temperance's
connection to revivalism was more than rhetorical, it was functional."
He elaborates that "the language of temperance flowed directly from
Northern pro-revival theology, and the reform became an inalienable
tenet of the antebellum evangelical worldview that infused Northerners'
work among the freed people" (6). He sees temperance activity as a
result of religious conviction, rather than solely class-based or
nativist anxieties and concerns with social control. Likewise, Thompson
finds Black Atlanta's temperance crusaders were not mere pawns of
northern reformers, but were acting out of a deeply held evangelical
faith.

Thompson's exploration of drinking patterns is particularly insightful.
In Chapter 2, Thompson asks: "was there an alcohol 'problem' in Black
Atlanta?" (50). He begins to answer this question with an analysis of
the convict lease system, in which incarcerated black men literally
built the New South. In 1873, twenty percent of Atlanta's all-white
police force was charged with being drunk on duty. Thompson describes a
July 30, 1883 incident in which an inebriated white police officer shot
and killed a pregnant African-American woman. He follows up with
numerous reports of habitually drunk administrators in the convict lease
system. These stories, Thompson concludes, "suggest that the freed
people's biggest problem with alcohol was its abuse by law enforcement
officers" (57).

Thompson's discussion of syncretic African-American cosmology is also
particularly suggestive. He demonstrates that African concepts of
hierarchy and reciprocity, and notions of community and the nature of
evil influenced African-American temperance discourse. Tellingly, he
argues, "Temperance reports ... reflected the traditional African
emphasis on the relationship between an individual's actions and
communal well-being" (131). Thus, Black Atlanta saw intemperance as an
existential threat to the community.

As Thompson clearly demonstrates, religion occupied a significant space
in the constellation of ideas that fed temperance and prohibition in
Black Atlanta. Scholars of temperance, alcohol, prohibition, African
American history, political history, the urban south, and southern
religion will very much enjoy *A Most Stirring and Significant Episode*.
It serves as a suitable compliment to recent books on this subject, such
as, Joe L. Coker's *Liquor in the Land of the Lost Cause: Southern White
Evangelicals and the Prohibition Movement* (2007), and Jennifer L.
Woodruff Tait's *The Poisoned Chalice: Eucharistic Grape Juice and
Common-Sense Realism in Victorian Methodism* (2011). Many will find in
it a model for pursuing similar community studies of African-American
temperance activities in other locales.
