---
layout: article
title: "Review: In Black and White"
author: Michele Gillespie
author-first: Michele
author-last: Gillespie
author-note: "Michele Gillespie is an associate professor of history at
Wake Forest University."
vol: 13
year: 2011
book-reviewed: "Lily Hardy Hammond. <em>In Black and White: An Interpretation of the
South</em>. Edited by Elna C. Green. Publications of the Southern Texts
Society. Athens: University of Georgia Press, 2008. 160 pp. ISBN
978-0-8203-3062-4."
---

"The evil is great everywhere; and we of the South have been slow to
start our part of the fight against it," wrote social reformer Lily
Hardy Hammond (1859--1925) in her classic critique of racism in the early
twentieth-century South, 1914's *In Black and White* (97). Born in New
Jersey---and raised in New York---to southern parents who left the South on
the eve of the Civil War, she married John Hammond in 1879, a
Georgia-born Methodist minister who had come north to study at Drew
Theological Seminary. Not only did Hammond's family roots lead her to
identify as a southerner, but also because of her husband's ministerial
call, she spent most of her adulthood living in different southern
communities. Hammond would become, as historian Elna C. Green explains
in her editorial introduction to *In Black and White*, "the South's most
prolific female writer on 'the race question'" (viii). Hammond's
turn-of-the-twentieth-century public career stood at the nexus of
progressivism and the social gospel movement. Unlike most other white
southern liberals of this era, she advocated a social reform agenda that
made its core mission a direct attack on racial inequality.

Hammond was an exceedingly prolific writer, yet her career has gone
largely unnoticed by historians. In the course of her own historical
research on the southern social welfare agenda, Green read Hammond's ten
books, along with dozens of essays, and found herself wondering why
Hammond is so little referenced today. Green especially questioned why
*In Black and White* remained out of print. Green herself leaves these
questions unanswered, careful to avoid "speculation" on a fragmentary
documentary record (xliv). Yet one key to understanding why Hammond was
allowed to lapse into historical obscurity, Green suggests, may lie
within a deeper examination of the Southern Methodist Church, whose
leadership seems to have deliberately forgotten Hammond and her
important contributions. That exploration lies beyond the scope of this
volume, but to correct the general lack of recognition of Hammond's
historical contributions Green has fortunately produced a meticulously
edited volume of this compelling book, as well as a substantive and
engaging biographical sketch of this important woman.

A leader in Nashville's Methodist community---the hub of Southern
Methodism, where the Hammonds lived for more than a decade---and
especially in the Methodist women's home mission movement, Hammond
devoted herself to trans-Atlantic scholarship on social welfare, quickly
developing into a leading southern authority on reform practices. As the
Southern Methodist Women's Missionary Council pushed out of the moral
realm and into the legislative arena to institute progressive change,
Hammond and other white middle class southern women like her found
themselves working with black middle class women in settlement houses,
school improvement associations, and civic organizations. Hammond's
experiences in this interracial world led her to conclude that the
leadership of the white urban middle class was key to stemming racial
discrimination. She expressed her beliefs in timely essays published in
Southern Methodist periodicals like *Our Home* and*Missionary Voice* as
well as national secular periodicals like *Harper's* and *South Atlantic
Quarterly*.

Hammond's most important work, however, was *In Black and White*. In
this forceful volume, she linked the absence of economic opportunity to
the multiple social ills that characterized southern black poverty. As
cure, she advocated social legislation and policies to promote urban
improvements ranging from publicly owned transportation to public health
programs. She dared whites in the period to refute their absence of
support for African Americans since emancipation. She cited lynching,
Jim Crow segregation, and white-constructed black slums as the most
obvious examples of widespread white moral failure. And, she was quick
to include the culpability of the Christian church in her analysis: "On
this question of race relationship the pulpit in the South is remarkably
quiet," she observed (3).

Hammond's language is heavily paternalistic to the modern reader. Her
insistence on the childlike behavior of black southerners is
off-putting, as are her heavy-handed nature metaphors. But her larger
indictment of white racism, the role white women could play in forcing
change, and the quiescence of the church offers a powerful social
critique by a Southern Methodist female leader in a period when most
southern reformers clung to class-based change alone.
