---
layout: article
title: "Review: Family Values in the Old South"
author: "Natalie Inman"
author-first: Natalie
author-last: Inman
author-note: "Natalie Inman is an assistant professor of history at
Cumberland University."
vol: 13
year: 2011
book-reviewed: "Craig Thompson Friend and Anya Jabour, eds. <em>Family Values in the Old
South</em>. Gainesville: University Press of Florida, 2010. 257 pp. ISBN
9780813036762."
---
*Family Values in the Old South* opens with a quote from the famous and
infamous *Gone With the Wind* (1936). Mammy chides Scarlett, "Ef you
doan care ‘bout how folks talks ‘bout dis family, Ah does" (1). *Family
Values* takes on the task of illuminating the facts about southern
family life while recognizing the role fictions have played both in
creating and obscuring those facts.

Craig Thompson Friend and Anya Jabour have put forth a collection of
essays that directly addresses one of today's most hotly contested
political issues, family values, and the historical subfield it has
spurred. Family history has been a staple of social history since the
1960s, but recent politics and explorations in other subfields, such as
gender and post-colonial studies, have reinvigorated the field with new
questions and new challenges. Friend and Jabour confront the historical
fictions of an idyllic southern family that both politicians and
historians have embraced in recent years invoking "the good old days"
during which family values ensured close knit, responsible, moral family
units which reinforced an interdependent, responsible, moral society.

*Family Values* presents a portrait of southern families that recognizes
the diverse family forms which rarely conformed to the stereotypical
nuclear family, highlights the resistance of individuals against
patriarchal authority, and depicts the limits of that diversity and
agency in the face of a pervasive southern family values which
reinforced patriarchal authority and racial hierarchy. Family history,
in recent years, has continued to refine and expand definitions of the
American, or southern, family, but has also realized the significance
family construction and family networks had on the larger political
framework of American society. *Family Values* is part of this larger
historiography, tapping into many of the main historical questions
surrounding the forms and functions of the family including member
roles, how race affected southern families, and how families utilized
their kinship connections to negotiate their legal status and political
futures. The introduction of this collection challenges the reader to
investigate the roots of the myth of the southern family, including what
family life really looked life, what realities challenged the authority
of patriarchs, and to what degree southern family values emphasizing
patriarchal authority put limits on the ability of women, children,
slaves, and poor whites to assert agency. The book is divided into three
parts: "Defining (and Defying) Southern Family Values," "Measuring
Families' Value," and "Family Values and Social Order."

Part one investigates the definitions of family values and their
influence on southern society. Nancy Zey contends that orphanages
enabled women to gain power in the patriarchal society of the South by
emphasizing women's maternal instincts within existing definitions of
southern family values. Emily West asserts that cross-plantation
marriages offered "a space for love, support, companionship, and a sense
of independence" for slaves as well as provided an opportunity for male
slaves to exhibit "'heroic' behavior that asserted their masculinity and
created valuable avenues of autonomy"(44, 43). Craig Thompson Friend
argues that the reactions of women and men to the deaths of their
children reflected the era's gender expectations and high infant
mortality rates, but also the complicated emotional relationships
between slaves and owners in their perceptions of "Our Family, White and
Black" (62). Anya Jabour maintains that same-sex relationships served as
an alternative for southern women to marriage and motherhood which women
often viewed as confining and even physically dangerous. Although
same-sex relationships offered equality and companionship free of the
risks of physical intimacy with males, such unions were temporary in the
South as few women eluded southern society's expectation that they would
either marry men or become "maiden aunts" assisting relatives with
childcare (103). Part one shows that southern family values required
patriarchal dominance over women and slaves, but was also challenged
with limited success by individuals who sought to redefine family for
themselves.

Part two details economic functions of the household and how economics
influenced the power of family members. Lynn Kennedy looks at sewing as
a vital, time-consuming economic activity in southern households that
freed up capital for other uses. Sewing held significant emotional
investment for women who felt they were caring for their families "white
and black," but also reflected racial, gender, and class hierarchies
(111). Nikki Burin describes the ways Anne and Richard Archer's "family
firm," or plantation, both enabled Anne to have significant power over
the plantation, but drove an emotional wedge between husband and wife.
Richard's absence left Anne with more power, but also significantly more
responsibility and stress than male agents managing the other Archer
plantations (134). Kirsten Wood notes that "public houses" straddled the
line between public accommodations and private homes creating a conflict
between contemporary guests' expectations of this service industry and
owner's "mastery" over their households in public, especially where
slaveholders were concerned (158). These three chapters illustrate the
ways slavery and gender shaped the economics of southern families and
challenged the distinctions between public and private spheres.

Part three of *Family Values* reflects recent historiographical
movements to define the relationship of the family to larger political
questions of sovereignty, voting patterns, and legal standing. Andrew
Frank uses the trial of George Stinson, a trader who had intermarried
into a Creek family, to show how Creek chiefs including William McIntosh
used native definitions of kinship and clan membership to assert Creek
sovereignty over trading rights. Christopher Olsen explains that
southern voting, especially at the local level, continued to reflect the
power of family networks and neighborhood loyalties rather than party
politics through the antebellum era. Through the story of the Remley
family of Charleston, South Carolina, Kevin Maillard argues that
reputation more than documented lineage continued to determine racial
status and legal rights in South Carolina even during and after the
Civil War. His case study illuminates the permeability of racial
boundaries and legal status as late as 1865. Each of these authors
contends that family networks were central to securing the political or
legal standing of their members in their communities.

*Family Values'*intersection with highly charged political and
historiographical debates makes it both relevant and controversial. The
essays in this volume are well researched and well argued. Emphasis on
slavery's impact on southern family values and source availability skews
the analysis of these essays slightly toward the stories of elites and
slaves and away from the non-slaveholding majority. Although touched on
in several of the essays, more material illustrating how the "Southern
family values" which privileged patriarchal white supremacy shaped the
values of non-slaveholding families would have rounded out the volume
nicely. Despite the connection between "family values" and religion in
recent and contemporary political debates, only one essay deals directly
with the impact of religious debates on definitions of family and gender
roles. The introduction most explicitly confronts current political
issues. The essays themselves engage the most up to date
historiographical debates in the sub-fields of family and gender
history, as well as in the fields of southern race relations, American
political history, American Indian history, and southern economic
history. The collection has the potential to stimulate productive
debates in many other sub-fields, including southern religious history,
as historians rethink the relationship of the family, in its many forms,
to other institutions.
