---
layout: article
title: "Review: God Speaks to Us, Too"
author: "Melody Maxwell"
author-first: Melody
author-last: Maxwell
author-note: "Melody Maxwell earned her PhD from International Baptist
Theological Seminary."
vol: 13
year: 2011
book-reviewed: "Susan M. Shaw. <em>God Speaks to Us, Too: Southern Baptist Women on Church,
Home, & Society</em>. Lexington: University Press of Kentucky, 2008. 300 pp.
ISBN 9780813124766."
---

Not often does one find a work that promises to delight the serious
scholar as well as the ordinary reader. Susan Shaw's *God Speaks to Us,
Too: Southern Baptist Women on Church, Home & Society* does just that.
The book's conversational style is reminiscent of a memoir rather than a
dry academic tome. In eminently readable prose, Shaw effectively conveys
the ideas and opinions of a myriad of Southern Baptist women whose
voices have too long been underrepresented in studies of southern
religion.

Through this ethnographic study, Shaw sets out to "understand how
Southern Baptist women make meaning of their lives, how they construct
gendered identities that are complex and often contradictory, and how
they understand themselves as Southern Baptist women" (8). The majority
of the book's pages narrate Shaw's interviews with 159 current and
former Southern Baptist women. "Former" is an important modifier to
note, since as a result of controversy in the Southern Baptist
Convention (SBC) around 40 percent of Shaw's interviewees have chosen to
affiliate with groups less conservative than the SBC. The book's
subtitle, then, is rather misleading: readers should understand that a
significant number of the women included would hesitate to call
themselves Southern Baptists. Also unlike typical Southern Baptist
women, around half of the study's participants boast a seminary
education, and many are employed full-time in religious vocations. To
her credit, Shaw "make\[s\] no claim that this book is objective or
represents all Southern Baptist women" (x). Yet one wonders how a more
representative sample population would have changed the work. Readers
would likely have gained a more accurate perspective on today's Southern
Baptists by hearing from more laywomen involved in the denomination's
conservative congregations, including its growing megachurches.

Representative or not, the women included in *God Speaks to Us, Too*
present fascinating first-hand accounts of their views on everything
from hospitality to the inspiration of the Bible. One of the book's
strengths is Shaw's commitment to let the women speak in their own
words, regardless of what she thinks about the theologies they espouse.
While Shaw does not hesitate to explain to readers her feminist views,
she treats her study participants with respect, refusing to caricature
their perspectives or choices. Shaw's work thus adds to the growing body
of scholarship that takes seriously women in conservative religious
traditions, such as Marie Griffith's *God's Daughters*(1997) and
Christel Manning's *God Gave Us the Right*(1999).

Unlike many such volumes, Shaw's writing is at times tinged with
nostalgia, demonstrating the tremendous cultural and social influence of
a Southern Baptist upbringing even upon a present-day feminist who no
longer participates in the SBC. Shaw effectively analyzes the regional
and historical contexts that have shaped this powerful sense of Southern
Baptist identity, taking care to explain denominational terminology for
non-Baptist readers. As moderate and progressive Baptists are especially
wont to do, Shaw emphasizes individual Baptists' freedom before God, or
"soul competency." Thus she understands her interviewees' varied
opinions as part of every Southern Baptist woman's right to interpret
her own faith through her direct relationship with God.

Shaw sympathetically explains to readers that "these women are more
complex, more thoughtful, kinder, and usually more rebellious than
outside observers might think" (5). The words of even the book's more
conservative interviewees prove this statement true. For example, Nancy
Moore affirms the common Southern Baptist belief that wives should
"graciously submit" to their husbands---but concedes that "I have never
known many women who were totally in submission to their husbands"
(189). And Grace Geddes explains her readiness to express a different
opinion from her pastor: "This is the house of the Lord, and if you
don't disagree once in a while, you'll never get it right" (255).
Readers will discover throughout *God Speaks to Us, Too* hundreds of
similar statements that reveal the necessity of moving beyond
stereotypes to a more nuanced understanding of Southern Baptist women.

This nuancing represents the book's greatest contribution: Shaw
implicitly calls scholars to reassess their views of Southern Baptist
women's agency, demonstrating through the voices of selected women the
ways they have negotiated their own roles in a conservative
denomination. *God Speaks to Us, Too* is not only a compelling read; it
is also a significant analysis of religion and gender that deserves
broad scholarly attention.
