---
layout: article
title: "Review: Jews and the Civil War"
author: "Benjamin L. Miller"
author-first: Benjamin L.
author-last: Miller
author-note: "Benjamin L. Miller is a doctoral candidate in history at
the University of Florida."
vol: 13
year: 2011
book-reviewed: "Jonathan D. Sarna and Adam Mendelsohn, eds. <em>Jews and the Civil War: A
Reader</em>. New York: New York University Press, 2010. 435 pp. ISBN
9780814740910."
---

In *Jews and the Civil War: A Reader*, editors Jonathan Sarna and Adam
Mendelsohn have assembled a collection of scholarly essays about the
Jewish experience in the Civil War era. Collectively, these essays shed
light on five decades of scholarship since the 1960 exhibit "The
American Jew in the Civil War." According to the editors, "this volume
rescues, organizes, and assembles choice examples of this literature"
(x). It achieves that goal by juxtaposing recent scholarship with older
works, which build on historian Bertram Korn's seminal *American Jewry
and the Civil War* (1951). This is an especially significant
achievement, given the relative lack of historical attention given to
the Jewish experience in the Civil War.

Neatly divided into seven parts, this collection examines the experience
of Jews from the antebellum era through Reconstruction. Organized
thematically, the topics explored include: Jews and Slavery; Jews and
Abolition; Rabbis and the March to War; Jewish Soldiers During the Civil
War; The Home Front; Jews as a Class; and Aftermath. Introduced by an
essay exploring the main arguments, each section includes two to four
articles. By mixing recent scholarship with older works, the sections
show the scholarly evolution of each topic. Also included is a
historiographic essay reviewing scholarship before Korn's integral work,
and an overview essay on the role of Jews during the Civil War. A
concluding section surveys other important works on the topic which
could not be included in this collection. Throughout, the editors point
to where the scholarship is weak, encouraging other scholars to pursue
it.

Among the more noteworthy essays is Stephen Ash's on how Grant's General
Order No. 11 affected the Jews of Paducah, Kentucky. In it, he explains
Grant's Order, as "the climax to a story of evolving social turmoil in
wartime America" (363). Paducah was "a microcosm of the wartime
Mississippi Valley" and Grant's order grew out of that region's
instability, conflict, and tension. According to Ash, the wartime
pressures in the area eventually found "an outlet in actions against a
helpless minority" (369). ''Shoddy' Anti-Semitism and the Civil War," by
Gary L. Bunker and John J. Appel, also merits special mention for its
use of cartoons to explore how print sources used the word "shoddy" to
develop a stereotype of the "unpatriotic Jew" (313).

A couple of interesting biographical studies show that in comparison to
their non-Jewish neighbors, Jewish Americans had similar wartime
experiences. In one essay, readers learn the story of Major Alfred
Mordecai, a southern-born Jew who decided to resign his military
commission on the eve of the conflict instead of fighting for either
side. This piece shows that Jewish career military went through the same
agonies as their non-Jewish comrades. A second article explores the
plight of a southern Jewish woman, Eugenia Levy Phillips, who received
punishment for openly defying the Union army. Non-Jewish southern women
received similar consequences for disloyal conduct when defying
individuals like the notorious Benjamin Butler.

Sarna and Mendelsohn have compiled a fine collection of essays which
explore the varied facets of the Jewish experience during the American
Civil War. This long overdue book should appeal to a broad readership of
scholars and amateur historians alike, those interested in Jewish
history or the American Civil War era more broadly.
