---
layout: article
title: "Review: Redeeming the Southern Family"
author: "Kristy L. Slominski"
author-first: Kristy L.
author-last: Slominski
author-note: "Kristy L. Slominski is a doctoral student in religious
studies at the University of California at Santa Barbara."
vol: 13
year: 2011
book-reviewed: "Scott Stephan. <em>Redeeming the Southern Family: Evangelical Women and
Domestic Devotion in the Antebellum South.</em> Athens: University of Georgia
Press, 2008. 304 pp. ISBN 9780820332222. 
---

Scott Stephan's *Redeeming the Southern Family*explores the centrality
of domestic piety within white evangelical families in the antebellum
South. Wives, who preachers deemed morally superior, assumed the
responsibility of upholding Christian values within their families while
guiding them through everyday life and major crises. These women used
their faith to derive meaning from their families' woes and triumphs,
reifying their connections to God at these major life turning points.

Women's domestic spiritual authority set them up for satisfaction and
disappointment in their family lives. As moral caregivers, they took
credit for bringing family members closer to God and carried the blame
when husbands or children sinned or rejected their faith. Some mothers
even blamed themselves when children died because they believed that God
took away children who were loved *too much* (and thus turned into
idols). Women who embraced the burden of leading domestic devotion
experienced feelings of "self-importance mixed with self-abnegation,
agency alongside resignation, and ultimately failure and anxiety
interlaced with success and optimism" (2). This study strikes an
important balance between recognizing the limits women experienced
within patriarchal authority and their ability to make meaning and
choices in spite of--and often because of--these restrictions.

The book analyzes evidence from evangelical women's personal diaries and
correspondences, as well as the family papers of elite families. While
at times it is difficult to tell whether some examples represented
larger trends in southern domestic devotion, this method provides a rich
portrait of a handful of wealthy, educated families, including their
quarrels and crises. Many of the women were married to ministers, and
this evidence provides a window into how domestic devotion was connected
to congregational life. In several cases, the author brings together
multiple generations of family records, which illustrate that mothers
brought their spiritual influence to bear on their children's spouses
and children's children. Writings from multiple generations also allow
Stephan to explore the continuity and changes in domestic devotion in
the decades leading up to the Civil War.

The book is divided into an introduction, five thematic chapters, and an
epilogue. After an overview of evangelical identity and worship patterns
in the antebellum South, each subsequent chapter covers a significant
stage in an evangelical woman's life, including romantic courtship,
evangelical marriages, childbirth and child rearing, and the death of
family members. Stephan's strategy is "to place individual women in the
relationships that mattered most to them," including their relationships
with God, parents, siblings, in-laws, spouses, children, and, in some
cases, slaves (10). He demonstrates that each relationship offered
unique opportunities and limitations for women to experience their faith
and exercise spiritual authority.

The most compelling contribution of this work is its exploration of
evangelical deathbed narratives in a chapter entitled "Authoring the
Good Death: Illness, Deathbed Narratives, and Women's Authority." Just
as conversion narratives served as evidence that people had entered
Christianity, deathbed narratives served as evidence that people
remained committed to Christianity as they exited this life. Women
played a central role at the deathbed, helping people die comfortably
surrounded by family and prayers, and helping to narrate their last
moments in ways that would convince others of their place in heaven.
Women had a stake in constructing these narratives because, as leaders
of domestic devotion, it was their responsibility to ensure that family
members died as Christians so that their families could be reunited in
heaven. Similarly, women found and discussed clues in the death events
of nonevangelicals to confirm their fate in hell, as a way of warning to
those evangelicals who wavered in their faith.

The biggest gap within this work concerns sexuality. Although the author
hints at sexual rumors that could ruin a woman's reputation, he omits
the issue of sexual activity. There is no discussion of the role of
intercourse in women's daily physical and spiritual lives other than the
fact that pregnancies did occur and men, especially ministers, were
often out of the home for business. If this is an omission of the
sources themselves - and one can guess why discussions of sex may not
have appeared in women's correspondences--it would have been helpful to
hear the author's interpretations of women's silence on this matter.

Another limitation of this work is the author's frequent adoption of his
subjects' distinction between evangelicals and "nonevangelicals." Even
though evangelicals made considerable efforts to distinguish themselves
from all nonevangelicals, they had some important things in common with
other religious people in the South. For example, Catholics, Jews, and
evangelical slaves were also concerned at times with separating
themselves from nonreligious neighbors and cultivating religion among
family members. A more nuanced analysis of other southern religious
perspectives would help to clarify what aspects of the domestic devotion
described were uniquely evangelical and white.

This book's in-depth look at women and domestic devotion makes a
valuable contribution to the study of women's history and southern
religion. Stephan builds off of Christine Leigh Heyrman's *Southern
Cross: The Beginning of the Bible Belt*(1997) and Cynthia Lynn Lyerly's
*Methodism and the Southern Mind, 1770-1810*(1998) by turning to second-
and third-generation evangelicals in the 1830s through the 1850s. The
study provides an explanation for the overwhelming number of females who
filled the pews of American evangelicalism: women were drawn to
Christianity because they experienced a unique sense of purpose and
fulfillment in their roles as "spiritual shepherds" to their families.
The work accomplishes multiple tasks while remaining accessible and
interesting, and I would therefore recommend this work for courses on
women's history, family studies, southern religion, and lived religion.
